CanViT: Toward Active-Vision Foundation Models.

By Yohaï-Eliel Berreby, Sabrina Du, Audrey Durand, and 1 more author.

Published on March 23, 2026.

Abstract Active computer vision promises efficient, biologically plausible perception through sequential, localized glimpses, but lacks scalable general-purpose archi­ tectures and pretraining pipelines. As a result, Active-Vision Foundation Models (AVFMs) have remained unexplored. We introduce CanViT, the first task- and policy-agnostic AVFM. CanViT uses scene-relative RoPE to bind a retinotopic Vision Transformer backbone and a spatiotopic scene-wide latent workspace, the canvas. Efficient interaction with this high-capacity working memory is supported by Canvas Attention, a novel asymmetric cross-attention mechanism. We decouple thinking (backbone-level) and memory (canvas-level), eliminating canvas-side self-attention and fully-connected layers to achieve low-latency sequential infer­ ence and scalability to large scenes. We propose a label-free active vision pretraining scheme, policy-agnostic passive-to-active dense latent distillation: reconstructing scene-wide DINOv3 embeddings from sequences of low-resolu­ tion glimpses with randomized locations, zoom levels, and lengths. We pretrain CanViT-B from a random initialization on 13. million ImageNet-21k scenes— an order of magnitude more than previous active models—and 1 billion random glimpses, in 166 hours on a single H100. On ADE20K segmentation, a frozen CanViT-B achieves 38.5% mIoU in a single low-resolution glimpse, outperform­ ing the best active model’s 27.6% with 19.5x fewer inference FLOPs and no finetuning, as well as its FLOP- or input-matched DINOv3 teacher. Given additional glimpses, CanViT-B reaches 45.9% ADE20K mIoU. On ImageNet-1k classifica­ tion, CanViT-B reaches 81.2% top-1 accuracy with frozen teacher probes. CanViT generalizes to longer rollouts, larger scenes, and new policies. Our work closes the wide gap between passive and active vision on semantic segmentation and demonstrates the potential of AVFMs as a new research axis. 1 Introduction Deep Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have achieved outstanding performance in a variety of computer vision tasks, and proven valuable to life sciences research as computational models of biological visual processing1–7. This practical and scientific success has largely hinged on vision encoders which process individual frames independently and passively, without the ability to reuse previous computation to guide further processing in a recurrent, active, human-like manner. Unlike most ANNs, humans sample their visual environment by actively and frequently orienting their sensory apparatus towards regions of interest (ROIs), through gaze shifts. This process is inherently sequential, and involves strategic planning8,9, integration of evidence across time in visual working memory10,11, and top-down recurrent feedback—rich conditioning of early visual pathways by signals from higher brain areas, allowing each fixation’s visual information to be processed in a contextually informed manner, based on what was seen earlier12–14, rather than tabula rasa. Preprint. Under review.

A 1024px

B t

𝑣0 = (𝑥0, 𝑦0, 𝑠0) (−0.4, −0.4, 0.5)

𝑣1 = (𝑥1, 𝑦1, 𝑠1) (0.6, −0.3, 0.4)

𝑣2 = (𝑥2, 𝑦2, 𝑠2) (−0.6, 0.6, 0.3)

𝑣3 = (𝑥3, 𝑦3, 𝑠3) (0.5, 0.7, 0.2) Scene

(x=−0.4, y=−0.4, s=0.5) (x=0.6, y=−0.3, s=0.4) (x=−0.6, y=0.6, s=0.3) (x=0.5, y=0.7, s=0.2)

Glimpse Canvas Canvas Δ → → →

ingests a 1282 px glimpse (B, 1st row), a crop extracted at a viewpoint with center (𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) ∈ [−1, +1]2 and scale (zoom level) 𝑠𝑡∈(0, 1]. This updates a scene-wide latent representation, the canvas, with which CanViT integrates broad context and fine detail from variable-scale glimpses, extrapolates to unobserved regions, and conditions visual processing on a working understanding of the scene. We visualize the canvas via Principal Component Analysis across tokens (B, 2nd row), and canvas updates (Δ) as cosine dissimilarity heatmaps across consecutive timesteps (B, 3rd row). Various Active Computer Vision (ACV) models have been proposed, drawing inspiration from human vision to process visual scenes through sequential, localized glimpses, in pursuit of biological relevance and computational efficiency15–26. Despite theoretical advantages, active vision models have struggled to match the accuracy, efficiency, flexibility and representational richness of their passive counterparts. This disconnect is particularly striking on dense prediction, which is unsup­ ported by most existing active vision models; the few exceptions23, lag dramatically behind passive models on standard benchmarks like ADE20K-SceneParse150 segmentation27. An active vision model can be considered along three axes: making sense of what it sees at a given moment (instantaneous vision); updating a persistent, evolving understanding of the scene, which may in turn inform further processing (memory); and deciding where and at what zoom level to look next (action selection). The first two axes define an observer’s ability to understand, persist, and recall visual inputs, while the last defines its input-selection strategy, or sensory policy. They do not play comparable roles: given perfect instantaneous vision and memory, naive and strategic policies should reach the same accuracy after enough glimpses of a static scene, but no policy can make up for a poor observer. Yet, prior ACV work has primarily focused on action selection15,23,24. Concurrently, passive-vision foundation models like DINOv328 excel at general-purpose instantaneous vision but lack essential active-vision components, as they have no concept of localized glimpses or memory. Focusing on the intersection of instantaneous vision and memory, we sought to build an ActiveVision Foundation Model (AVFM): a vision model capable of understanding the spatial and semantic structure of scenes across arbitrary sequences of glimpses, with rich representations that transfer across tasks and viewing policies. Disentangling “how to see in an active-vision setting” from “where to look” frees active vision pretraining from the complexity of Reinforcement Learning (RL) while facilitating real-world deployment, where physical limitations—for example, a motorized camera’s range of motion and optical zoom levels—may impose additional constraints on viewing policies. Contributions. We introduce the Canvas Vision Transformer (CanViT), a novel recurrent ViT architecture (Section 4) pretrained with a novel passive-to-active distillation scheme (Section 5). We evaluate a frozen CanViT-B’s zero-shot transfer across tasks, policies, temporal horizons and resolutions (Section 6). Even without fine-tuning, CanViT establishes a new accuracy–efficiency frontier on ADE20K active segmentation while delivering competitive ImageNet-1K performance and strong generalization. Our work introduces AVFMs as a new research axis, empirically validates their potential, and provides a blueprint for future research on general-purpose active vision.

2 Related Work Deep active vision. Deep active vision models typically process sequences of glimpses—fixed- or variable-scale crops extracted from a larger image or video. This line of research traces back to Mnih’s Recurrent Attention Model (RAM)15, and remained largely confined to simple tasks such as digit recognition16, until 2019, when Saccader18 achieved 75% ImageNet-1K top-1 accuracy by introducing an intermediate pretraining step to stabilize learning. GFNet19 and AdaptiveNN25 later showed that active vision could deliver computational efficiency gains on real-world tasks, although both remained structurally limited to classification and fixed zoom levels. Dense prediction in active vision. Most active vision architectures cannot produce the scene-wide, spatially dense outputs required for semantic segmentation, depth estimation, and other dense tasks. Among the few exceptions, AME23 and AdaGlimpse24 both achieve dense prediction through posthoc expansion of encoder outputs: at each timestep, a MAE-style29 Transformer decoder receives all encoded glimpse tokens with a full grid of learnable mask tokens and performs self-attention over the entire grid to produce scene-wide predictions, becoming intractable at high scene resolutions where active vision may be most appealing. Despite being the active-vision state of the art on the ADE20K segmentation benchmark, these models respectively achieve only 27.6% and 25.7% mIoU. Dense latent distillation in ViTs. The visuospatial intelligence acquired through extensive selfsupervised pretraining can be quickly transferred into randomly-initialized models: DINOv230 and DINOv328 distilled their largest model into ViTs of various sizes using the same dataset and the same loss function as during pretraining. Proteus31 distilled DINOv2-{g,L}/1430 into a smaller model using 100× less data than during pretraining and a simple loss combining CLS token matching with dense feature matching. Our passive-to-active dense distillation follows a similar philosophy to Proteus, transferring across problem settings rather than across model sizes: we use a passive teacher’s visual world knowledge to teach an active student how to see from arbitrary glimpse sequences. Cross-attention for dimensionality/computation decoupling. Set Transformer32 introduced crossattention routing through a compact set of inducing points to avoid quadratic pairwise attention over input tokens, an approach that was popularized by Perceiver models33, in other contexts, then further generalized by Recurrent Interface Networks (RINs)35. Like RINs, CanViT alternates read and write cross-attention across depth and time, although with external input on the few-token side (backbone) and recurrent state on the many-token side (canvas). Moreover, CanViT’s many-token side forgoes not only self-attention, but also all fully-connected layers: canvas tokens never go through MultiLayer Perceptrons (MLPs), QKVO projections in cross-attention, or GRU36/LSTM37 recurrent gates. Latent-space recurrent reasoning. Weight-tied recurrent processing over a fixed external input decouples representational capacity from effective computational depth, enabling improved algo­ rithmic reasoning38–42 and flexible test-time compute allocation43,44. This paradigm has recently seen renewed interest, particularly in the Large Language Model (LLM) space45, and for its ability to produce small yet highly capable models41,42. Such models leverage top-down recurrent feedback to reuse previous computation, rather than losing most of it to ephemeral step-wise outputs. Active vision—and active sensing in general—offers an opportunity to generalize this framework, allowing each weight-tied processing step to benefit from a new perspective on the model’s input or environ­ ment in addition to its working understanding of it. CanViT implements this idea with a semantically rich (rather than pixel-like) latent workspace, the canvas, which is inexpensively decoded at each timestep and provides top-down recurrent feedback for early layers to build upon. 3 Preliminaries Definitions: Scenes, Glimpses, Viewpoints. For a timestep 𝑡∈ℕ, we consider a bounded 2D scene, which can be formally represented as a function 𝜓𝑡: [−1, +1]2 →ℝ3 mapping continuous-valued (𝑥, 𝑦) coordinates to RGB triplets. This formulation is compatible with time-varying scenes without a pre-set spatial resolution, for example, a video feed from a camera with motorized lenses. When the scene is a static image, 𝜓𝑡= 𝜓0 for all timesteps, and 𝜓0 simply samples from a pixel grid. We define a glimpse as a fixed-resolution crop, extracted at a viewpoint 𝒗𝑡= (𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑡, 𝑠𝑡), where (𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑡) ∈[−1, +1]2 is the crop center in scene coordinates and 𝑠𝑡∈(0, 1] is the crop’s scale, or half-side-length. That is, the crop spans the scene coordinates [𝑥𝑡−𝑠𝑡, 𝑥𝑡+ 𝑠𝑡] × [𝑦𝑡−𝑠𝑡, 𝑦𝑡+ 𝑠𝑡], covering a fraction 𝑠2 𝑡 of

the scene’s surface area. Regardless of its scale 𝑠𝑡, the crop is resized to a fixed resolution of 𝐻𝑔× 𝑊𝑔 pixels, which determines its information capacity; under that constraint, 𝑠𝑡 smoothly controls the tradeoff between spatial coverage and perception of detail. General-Purpose, Spatially-Grounded Active Vision. An AVFM, in the sense that we describe in the Introduction, should build up a general-purpose understanding of the scene through a sequence of glimpses that it perceives, allowing each additional processing step to build upon and refine this understanding. This evolving latent representation should be readily decodable into predictions at every timestep, whether for non-spatial, global prediction tasks like object classification or spatiallygrounded, dense tasks like semantic segmentation or depth estimation. The latter require explicit architectural handling, as the active vision setting breaks the direct, connectivity-based mapping between input and output feature maps that passive Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) and ViTs commonly exploit: glimpses need not be aligned with the scene from which they are extracted. To address this problem, we introduce the Canvas Vision Transformer, or CanViT (Section 4), a recurrent vision architecture built around a scene-wide latent representation called the canvas.

backbone (purple, left-hand columns), which processes localized glimpses (blue), with a canvas (red, right-hand columns), a fine-grained scene-wide spatio-semantic memory. At each timestep 𝑡, a glimpse is extracted from a viewpoint 𝒗𝑡= (𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑡, 𝑠𝑡), patchified, and processed through the backbone, alongside a recurrent CLS token and a Viewpoint Encoding (VPE) token. The canvas regularly interacts with the glimpse stream via Canvas Attention (Figure 3), alternating between read (R) and write (W) operations to, respectively, condition the backbone’s processing on the canvas and populate the canvas. Both streams are equipped with register tokens47.

4 The Canvas Vision Transformer (CanViT) The CanViT architecture (Figure 2) formulates active-vision processing in a dual-stream manner, as the interaction between a high-capacity memory stream (the canvas) and a ViT48 backbone’s compact processing stream. These two streams interact bidirectionally through Canvas Attention (Figure 3), an asymmetric cross-attention mechanism which allows the backbone to efficiently pull information from the canvas and send updates to it. The backbone stream, made up of 𝐷bb-dimensional tokens, is largely ephemeral. Each glimpse is extracted from the scene at the provided viewpoint, split into 162 px patches, and fed to a ViT backbone alongside ephemeral register tokens47, a single recurrent CLS token, and a viewpoint encoding (VPE) token derived from the glimpse’s position and zoom level. Since spatial alignment between consecutive patch grids cannot be assumed, as a glimpse may be taken from any position and at any zoom level, patch tokens cannot be directly forwarded across time without destroying their grid structure. Instead, CanViT persists relevant information from each glimpse via the canvas stream. The canvas stream, made up of 𝐷can-dimensional tokens, is fully persistent. The canvas acts as a scene-wide spatio-semantic memory, which can function as a cognitive map49 of the scene. It comprises a few non-spatial canvas registers, which act as a non-spatial memory, and a large 𝐻× 𝑊 spatial grid of canvas patches tiling the [−1, +1]2 scene coordinate space. At the start of each rollout, this grid is broadcasted to the desired size from a single learnable initial patch, enabling the canvas resolution to be set at inference time. Each canvas patch maps onto a fixed scene region, regardless of the current viewpoint, thus allowing direct token-wise decoding into dense predictions and unbroken gradient flow across time. After initialization, the canvas is read from and written to by consecutive Canvas Attention layers, whose outputs are residuals injected into each stream. No MLPs or selfattention layers are applied to canvas tokens, which evolve solely by interacting with the backbone via Canvas Attention Write operations. This restriction is key to CanViT’s efficiency, as the canvas stream is designed to accommodate a much larger number of tokens than the backbone stream. Scene-Relative Rotary Position Embeddings (SR-RoPE). We compute 2D RoPE50, from the centers of glimpse patches and canvas patches in the scene’s [−1, +1]2 coordinate system, both in the ViT backbone’s self-attention and in Canvas Attention layers. The positions of glimpse patch centers depend on the current viewpoint, with their relative distances implicitly communicating the viewing scale 𝑠𝑡 (zoom): as shown on Figure 1, a zoomed-in glimpse’s patches span a small, tightly-clustered region of the scene coordinate space, while a zoomed-out glimpse’s tokens span a wider region. The positions of canvas patches are constant for any given canvas grid size, since they uniformly tile the scene. Consistent use of scene-relative (SR) coordinates binds the retinotopic backbone stream and the spatiotopic canvas stream with a shared reference frame, while the use of RoPE allows CanViT to generalize well across glimpse and canvas patch grid sizes. Canvas Attention (Figure 3; pseudocode in Appendix Section B), a mechanism based on crossattention, enables efficient interaction between CanViT’s relatively small set of glimpse tokens and its much larger set of canvas tokens. We alternate between Read and Write operations along depth (and, implicitly, time) using a stride of 2 ViT blocks in CanViT-B. In a Read, backbone tokens query the canvas; in a Write, canvas tokens query the backbone. In both cases, the cross-attention output is added back to the querying stream via residual addition. SR-RoPE makes this process spatially aware, allowing Canvas Attention to bind the two streams. Unlike standard cross-attention imple­ mentations (for example, nn.MultiHeadAttention in PyTorch52, or Flax’s nnx.MultiHeadAttention in the JAX ecosystem53,54), Canvas Attention restricts Query, Key, Value and Output (QKVO) projections to one side of the computation (backbone-side tokens), applying only LayerNorm, RoPE (for Queries/ Keys) and element-wise residual addition to the other token set (canvas-side tokens). Asymmetric projections. The glimpse token count 𝑁bb must be kept low due to the quadratic cost of the ViT backbone’s self-attention, and it is desirable for the canvas to have high information capacity both spatially, by tiling the scene in a fine-grained manner with a large number 𝐻× 𝑊 of canvas patch tokens (making up the bulk of the 𝑁can canvas tokens), and semantically at any given position within the scene, with a large canvas embedding dimension 𝐷can. This makes the asymmetric design of Canvas Attention highly advantageous, as the FLOP footprint of a single canvas-side projection relative to the Scaled Dot Product Attention (SDPA) call that it accompanies would be:

scene glimpse (𝑠= 1). Right: FLOP savings from eliminating canvas-side projections. projection FLOPs SDPA FLOPs = 2𝑁can𝐷can𝑑 4𝑁bb𝑁can𝑑= 𝐷can 2𝑁bb, (1) which is a 7.2x ratio with 𝐷can = 1024 and 𝑁bb = 71 (64 glimpse patches, 5 registers, and CLS + VPE tokens). In CanViT-B, with a 32 × 32 canvas patch grid, adding canvas-side QKVO projections would increase the cost of each Canvas Attention Read/Write pair from 1. to 9. GFLOPs. This effect is exacerbated when using smaller glimpses and more canvas tokens (Figure 3, Right). Viewpoint Encoding (VPE) Token. We supplement SR-RoPE, which distributes the encoding of viewpoint position and scale over glimpse and canvas patches, with a dedicated viewpoint encoding (VPE) token. The VPE token is instantiated at a given glimpse by encoding the current viewpoint (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠) as the triplet (𝑥 𝑠, 𝑦 𝑠, log 𝑠), a parameterization with scale invariance, translation invariance, and planar isotropy properties (Appendix Section C). We lift this triplet into backbone embedding space via Random Fourier Features (RFF)55, then apply layer normalization56 before letting the backbone process it alongside the other glimpse tokens (patches, registers, and recurrent CLS token). The VPE token is meant to facilitate future end-to-end policy learning by allowing the next viewpoint to be decoded from a rich transformation of the current viewpoint; pretraining ablations show it to give a modest boost in reconstruction quality (Table 3 k). 5 Policy-Agnostic Passive-to-Active Dense Latent Distillation As outlined in the Introduction, an active vision model should (1) make sense of what it sees, (2) integrate observations into a persistent scene representation, and (3) decide where to look next. Here, we ask: how can we teach CanViT (1) and (2) in a task-agnostic, spatially aware, label-free manner, while remaining robust to the choice of policy (3)? 5. Passive-to-Active Dense Distillation A natural pretext task for active-vision pretraining is scene reconstruction: training the model to produce a best-guess approximation of the overall scene from a sequence of glimpses. This incen­ tivizes understanding of the spatial and semantic structure of scenes, in order to faithfully extrapolate to unseen regions and details. Since our goal is for CanViT to iteratively build a semantically rich “mental image”, we formulate this reconstruction objective in DINOv328 latent space, rather than in pixel space like passive Masked Autoencoders (MAEs)29 and some active vision models24.

Teacher. The computer vision community has invested considerable resources into training passive vision foundation models with rich world knowledge and visual intelligence. We build upon these efforts by leveraging the DINOv328 model family, a modern self-supervised vision model family with excellent high-resolution generalization, whose dense representations deliver state-of-the-art zero-shot transfer to classification, segmentation, depth estimation, and other downstream tasks. We use DINOv3 ViT-B as a high-resolution scene-wide spatio-semantic teacher, which produces patch tokens (dense features) and a global CLS token. These highly informative reference embeddings represent an idealized scene understanding for CanViT to match using sequences of cheap, partial glimpses. High-resolution teacher inference is much more computationally intensive than a single CanViT forward pass; however, since the teacher is frozen, we precompute reference features once, storing them for subsequent use across epochs and hyperparameter sweeps (Section D.2). Target standardization. Teacher features exhibit position-dependent statistics: tokens at different spatial locations have different means and variances. We apply per-position z-score standardization to reconstruction targets, based on mean and variance precomputed independently for each position and embedding dimension from a representative sample of 4096 images. Decoding. At each timestep 𝑡, CanViT produces updated canvas tokens, including canvas patches 𝑪𝑡∈ℝ𝐻×𝑊×𝐷can and canvas registers, and an updated CLS token 𝒉𝑡∈ℝ𝐷bb. We apply layer normalization56, then decode into DINOv3-space reconstructions via token-wise linear projections: ̂𝒁𝑡= 𝑊spatial ⋅LayerNorm(𝑪𝑡), ̂𝒛𝑡= 𝑊global ⋅LayerNorm(𝒉𝑡) (2) Loss. Our loss combines patch-level and CLS-level reconstruction, averaged across space and time: ℒ︀= 1 𝑇∑ 𝑇−1 𝑡=0 [

𝐻𝑊‖ ̂𝒁𝑡−𝒁∗‖2 𝐹+ ‖̂𝒛𝑡−𝒛∗‖2] (3) 5. Policy Agnosticism To keep our model robust to the choice of policy, we implement a rollout randomization scheme. Dual rollouts. At each pretraining step, we run two independent branches from a freshly-initialized canvas, averaging their losses. These branches and their viewpoint sampling policies are referred to as R-IID and F-IID, and only differ by their treatment of the 𝑡= 0 viewpoint. The R-IID (Randomthen-IID) branch treats all timesteps identically, including 𝑡= 0, keeping the model robust to arbitrary rollout starts. The F-IID (Full-then-IID) branch always starts with the full-scene zoomedout viewpoint (𝑥0, 𝑦0, 𝑠0) = (0, 0, 1), which provides a low-resolution but high-spatial-coverage view of each scene at least once over the course of pretraining. In our ablations, we found the use of 1 F-IID + 1 R-IID branch to accelerate convergence compared to 2 R-IID branches, even when evaluating on held-out data using an R-IID policy (Table 3 h). Sampling of viewpoint center and scale. For all non-initial timesteps, as well as the 𝑡= 0 timestep of the R-IID branch, we sample 𝐿2 ∼𝒰︀([𝐿2 min, 𝐿2 max]) and set 𝑠= 1 −𝐿. For a glimpse of scale 𝑠, valid centers form a box of half-side-length 1 −𝑠; we draw (𝑥, 𝑦) uniformly within it. The resulting marginal scale density is 𝑝(𝑠) ∝(1 −𝑠), favoring smaller, more localized glimpses. We set the minimum glimpse size to 𝑠min = 0.05, or 0.25% of the scene’s area. Rollout length randomization. Backpropagation Through Time  (BPTT) over long glimpse sequences would require retaining activations from each forward pass through the backbone, or using gradient checkpointing to mitigate memory footprint growth at the cost of additional backwardpass computation. Additionally, long-horizon backpropagation comes with the risk of vanishing or exploding gradients. Our loss provides temporally dense supervision, with per-timestep credit assignment, which allows us to train CanViT with truncated BPTT over chunks of only 𝐾= 2 glimpses. At each chunk boundary, we stop the rollout with probability 𝑝stop = 0.5, resulting in a geometric distribution of chunk counts with an average sequence length of 𝑇= 𝐾/𝑝stop = 4 glimpses while occasionally exposing the model to longer sequences. This scheme ensures sequence length robustness on a constant train-time VRAM footprint, with a modest train-time compute overhead due to the low average sequence length.

6 Experiments To evaluate our approach’s zero-shot transfer across tasks, policies, temporal horizons and scene resolutions, we pretrain a general-purpose CanViT-B checkpoint. After pretraining, we freeze the resulting weights and conduct linear-probing evaluations on downstream tasks, with various policies (Figure 4). Additional details on evaluation methodology and results are provided in Appendix Section F. We additionally benchmark inference latency to verify that CanViT’s FLOP efficiency translates into wall-clock speedups (Appendix Section I). Pretraining. We pretrain CanViT-B from a random initialization in just 166 hours on a single H100 using the scheme described in Section 5, sampling approximately 1 billion 1282 px glimpses from 13. million 5122 px ImageNet-21k57, scenes. We use a 32 × 32 canvas patch grid during pretraining. Additional details on pretraining are provided in Appendix Section D and in the code release, with a detailed ablation study in Appendix Section E. Tasks. We evaluate on ADE20K27 semantic segmentation and ImageNet-1K classification. For ADE20K, we train linear probes to predict segmentation masks directly from canvas tokens. For ImageNet-1K, we assess zero-shot transfer from linear probes trained on DINOv3 ViT-B CLS tokens (Section H), and applied to CanViT-B’s destandardized CLS reconstructions for evaluation. Policies. To assess CanViT’s ability to generalize across policies and their impact on task perfor­ mance, we supplement the R-IID and F-IID train-time policies described in Section 5. with addi­ tional inference-time-only policies. We introduce a Coarse-to-Fine (C2F) policy, which traverses a quadtree over the scene, deterministically decreasing the viewpoint scale as the rollout progresses while randomizing the visitation order at each scale. To isolate the effect of processing order, we pair C2F with the Fine-to-Coarse (F2C) policy, which reverses C2F viewpoint sequences. For ADE20K, we also introduce an Entropy-guided variant of C2F, which greedily selects the highest-uncertainty tile among those that have not yet been visited at a given scale, using the segmentation probe’s perposition class entropy. This image-dependent dynamic policy showcases the ability of the canvas to guide viewpoint selection, even without RL. Lastly, to disentangle the impact of additional recurrent processing from that of ingesting different inputs, we consider a Repeated Full-Scene policy, which simply iterates over the (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑠) = (0, 0, 1) zoomed-out viewpoint. 6. Results A new frontier on ADE20K active segmentation (Figure 4A). From a single zoomed-out 1282 px glimpse, a frozen CanViT-B reaches 38.5% mIoU on ADE20K at 15. GFLOPs, exceeding its DINOv3 ViT-B/16 teacher even at higher compute (33.2% at 18. GFLOPs; Table 5). This surpasses the previous active-vision state of the art, AME (SETR), whose peak ADE20K mIoU of 27.6% requires up to 309 GFLOPs. CanViT’s performance is striking, as AME (SETR) was initialized from the weights of a ViT-L that was specifically trained on ADE20K semantic segmentation59, while our model is considerably smaller, trained from a random initialization on a different dataset without task labels, and is evaluated without any task-specific fine-tuning. With the C2F policy and a 642 canvas, CanViT-B reaches 45.9% mIoU. Even with a worse-than-random policy (F2C), CanViT-B outperforms prior active vision models on accuracy and efficiency. Zero-shot generalization across policies, horizons and resolutions (Figure 4B, C). C2F, never seen during training, outperforms both training-time policies on ADE20K from 𝑡= 1 onward (ADE20K mIoU at 𝑡= 4: C2F 43.2% vs. F-IID 41.7%; IN1K top-1: C2F 80.8% vs. F-IID 80.1%). Processing order matters: after identical image coverage at 𝑡= 20, C2F (44.2% mIoU) outperforms F2C (41.1%) on ADE20K; this effect is also present on ImageNet-1k (Figure 4 C). Entropy-guided C2F improves over naive C2F at early timesteps (41.1% vs. 40.2% mIoU at 𝑡= 1). Performance improves through 𝑇= 21 glimpses on both tasks, well beyond the average of 𝑇≈4 used during pretraining. Even with a constant input (Repeated Full-Scene), recurrent processing improves mIoU from 38.5% to 40% (𝑡= 0 →1), but then declines to 38.2% by 𝑡= 20, highlighting the importance of diverse viewpoints. Despite training exclusively on 5122 px scenes with a 322 canvas, evaluating CanViT-B’s frozen weights on 10242 px scenes with a 642 canvas consistently provides an accuracy boost, with the gap widening at longer temporal horizons (+1.2pp at 𝑡= 0, +1.7pp at 𝑡= 20; C2F: 45.9% vs. 44.2%).

parison with prior active models on ADE20K segmentation. (B) Effect of viewing policy and canvas resolution (ADE20K segmentation). (C) Effect of viewing policy (ImageNet-1k classification). Strong object classification without fine-tuning (Figure 4C). On ImageNet-1k (Table 7), CanViTB reaches 81.2% top-1 accuracy with the C2F policy and 𝑇= 21 using frozen teacher probes, outperforming AdaGlimpse’s24 77.5% and second only to AdaptiveNN’s25 82.2% among active vision models, despite these baselines relying on end-to-end RL and full-weights task-specific training. Accuracy improves with additional glimpses (C2F: 76.8% → 81.2%) and converges faster than on ADE20K, with the gap between F-IID and C2F policies quickly vanishing. 7 Conclusion CanViT brings the foundation model playbook to active vision, with a general-purpose active-vision model that can be used as-is across tasks and viewing policies. Our results show that pairing a care­ fully designed active-vision architecture with a highly informative, spatially grounded learning signal is sufficient to dramatically advance the state of the art on active segmentation, narrowing the wide gap between passive and active vision models without relying on complex RL pipelines, extensive pretraining, task-specific full-weights fine-tuning, or initialization with weights from a pretrained encoder. Even with the F2C policy’s worse-than-random viewing order, CanViT outperforms all prior active models on ADE20K active segmentation, validating our assumption that perception, not policy, has been the primary bottleneck in this task. CanViT displays strong zero-shot generalization to unseen structured policies, long viewpoint sequences, and high-resolution scenes and canvas grids, coupled with high computational efficiency at both training and inference, and the ability to derive non-trivial image-dependent viewing policies from first principles using the structure offered by the canvas. Our work highlights the potential of Active-Vision Foundation Models as a promising new paradigm for active vision research, and provides a novel active-vision architecture and an efficient passive-to-active knowledge distillation scheme for practitioners to build upon. Limitations and future work. While we trained and evaluated CanViT on static natural images, CanViT’s recurrent, constant-memory design and low inference latency even at high scene resolu­ tions make it a natural candidate for adaptation to real-time video processing and, ultimately, embodied active perception. We evaluated CanViT using hand-designed viewing policies without early stopping at inference time; learning viewing policies end-to-end and incorporating confidencebased early stopping are natural next steps to further improve efficiency. Our pretraining scheme currently depends on a pretrained passive teacher; dense latent bootstrapping30,60, could be adapted to the active-vision setting to remove the dependency. Finally, all results use a single model size (ViT-B), pretrained using a relatively modest compute budget and evaluated with linear probing from frozen weights and, for classification, probes transferred directly from the teacher rather than trained on CanViT features; we expect further gains from using larger models, pretraining them more extensively and evaluating them with full-weights fine-tuning.

Thanks for listening. This has been an audio narration of CanViT: Toward Active-Vision Foundation Models. By Yohaï-Eliel Berreby, Sabrina Du, Audrey Durand, and 1 more author. Published on March 23, 2026. Narrated by un. archive dot org, an app made by Sean Ahrens and Claude.