Attention Is All You Need.

Published June 2017.

By Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, and 5 more authors.

Narration by un. archive.org.

olorred
Provided proper attribution is provided, Google hereby grants permission to reproduce the tables and figures in this paper solely for use in journalistic or scholarly works.

Abstract.

The dominant sequence transduction models are based on complex recurrent or convolutional neural networks that include an encoder and a decoder. The best performing models also connect the encoder and decoder through an attention mechanism. We propose a new simple network architecture, the Transformer, based solely on attention mechanisms, dispensing with recurrence and convolutions entirely. Experiments on two machine translation tasks show these models to be superior in quality while being more parallelizable and requiring significantly less time to train. Our model achieves 28.4 BLEU on the WMT 2014 English-to-German translation task, improving over the existing best results, including ensembles, by over 2 BLEU. On the WMT 2014 English-to-French translation task, our model establishes a new single-model state-of-the-art BLEU score of 41.8 after training for 3.5 days on eight GPUs, a small fraction of the training costs of the best models from the literature. We show that the Transformer generalizes well to other tasks by applying it successfully to English constituency parsing both with large and limited training data.

Introduction.

Recurrent neural networks, long short-term memory and gated recurrent neural networks in particular, have been firmly established as state of the art approaches in sequence modeling and transduction problems such as language modeling and machine translation . Numerous efforts have since continued to push the boundaries of recurrent language models and encoder-decoder architectures .

Recurrent models typically factor computation along the symbol positions of the input and output sequences. Aligning the positions to steps in computation time, they generate a sequence of hidden states ht , as a function of the previous hidden state h and the input for position t . This inherently sequential nature precludes parallelization within training examples, which becomes critical at longer sequence lengths, as memory constraints limit batching across examples.

Recent work has achieved significant improvements in computational efficiency through factorization tricks and conditional computation , while also improving model performance in case of the latter. The fundamental constraint of sequential computation, however, remains.

Attention mechanisms have become an integral part of compelling sequence modeling and transduction models in various tasks, allowing modeling of dependencies without regard to their distance in the input or output sequences . In all but a few cases , however, such attention mechanisms are used in conjunction with a recurrent network.

In this work we propose the Transformer, a model architecture eschewing recurrence and instead relying entirely on an attention mechanism to draw global dependencies between input and output. The Transformer allows for significantly more parallelization and can reach a new state of the art in translation quality after being trained for as little as twelve hours on eight P100 GPUs.

Background.

The goal of reducing sequential computation also forms the foundation of the Extended Neural GPU , ByteNet and ConvS2S , all of which use convolutional neural networks as basic building block, computing hidden representations in parallel for all input and output positions. In these models, the number of operations required to relate signals from two arbitrary input or output positions grows in the distance between positions, linearly for ConvS2S and logarithmically for ByteNet. This makes it more difficult to learn dependencies between distant positions . In the Transformer this is reduced to a constant number of operations, albeit at the cost of reduced effective resolution due to averaging attention-weighted positions, an effect we counteract with Multi-Head Attention as described in section .

Self-attention, sometimes called intra-attention is an attention mechanism relating different positions of a single sequence in order to compute a representation of the sequence. Self-attention has been used successfully in a variety of tasks including reading comprehension, abstractive summarization, textual entailment and learning task-independent sentence representations .

End-to-end memory networks are based on a recurrent attention mechanism instead of sequence-aligned recurrence and have been shown to perform well on simple-language question answering and language modeling tasks .

To the best of our knowledge, however, the Transformer is the first transduction model relying entirely on self-attention to compute representations of its input and output without using sequence-aligned RNNs or convolution.
In the following sections, we will describe the Transformer, motivate self-attention and discuss its advantages over models such as and .

Model Architecture.

Most competitive neural sequence transduction models have an encoder-decoder structure . Here, the encoder maps an input sequence of symbol representations (x1, ..., xn) to a sequence of continuous representations z = (z1, ..., zn) . Given z , the decoder then generates an output sequence (y1,...,ym) of symbols one element at a time. At each step the model is auto-regressive , consuming the previously generated symbols as additional input when generating the next.

The Transformer follows this overall architecture using stacked self-attention and point-wise, fully connected layers for both the encoder and decoder, shown in the left and right halves of Figure , respectively.

Encoder and Decoder Stacks.

Encoder:The encoder is composed of a stack of N=6 identical layers. Each layer has two sub-layers. The first is a multi-head self-attention mechanism, and the second is a simple, position-wise fully connected feed-forward network. We employ a residual connection around each of the two sub-layers, followed by layer normalization . That is, the output of each sub-layer is LayerNorm(x + Sublayer(x)) , where Sublayer(x) is the function implemented by the sub-layer itself. To facilitate these residual connections, all sub-layers in the model, as well as the embedding layers, produce outputs of dimension model=512 ..

Decoder:The decoder is also composed of a stack of N=6 identical layers. In addition to the two sub-layers in each encoder layer, the decoder inserts a third sub-layer, which performs multi-head attention over the output of the encoder stack. Similar to the encoder, we employ residual connections around each of the sub-layers, followed by layer normalization. We also modify the self-attention sub-layer in the decoder stack to prevent positions from attending to subsequent positions. This masking, combined with fact that the output embeddings are offset by one position, ensures that the predictions for position i can depend only on the known outputs at positions less than i ..

Attention An attention function can be described as mapping a query and a set of key-value pairs to an output, where the query, keys, values, and output are all vectors. The output is computed as a weighted sum of the values, where the weight assigned to each value is computed by a compatibility function of the query with the corresponding key..

Scaled Dot-Product Attention.

We call our particular attention "Scaled Dot-Product Attention" (Figure ). The input consists of queries and keys of dimension dk , and values of dimension dv . We compute the dot products of the query with all keys, divide each by dk , and apply a softmax function to obtain the weights on the values.

In practice, we compute the attention function on a set of queries simultaneously, packed together into a matrix Q . The keys and values are also packed together into matrices K and V . We compute the matrix of outputs as:

Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax(QKTdk)V

The two most commonly used attention functions are additive attention , and dot-product (multiplicative) attention. Dot-product attention is identical to our algorithm, except for the scaling factor of 1dk . Additive attention computes the compatibility function using a feed-forward network with a single hidden layer. While the two are similar in theoretical complexity, dot-product attention is much faster and more space-efficient in practice, since it can be implemented using highly optimized matrix multiplication code.

While for small values of dk the two mechanisms perform similarly, additive attention outperforms dot product attention without scaling for larger values of dk . We suspect that for large values of dk , the dot products grow large in magnitude, pushing the softmax function into regions where it has extremely small gradients . To counteract this effect, we scale the dot products by 1dk .

Multi-Head Attention.

Instead of performing a single attention function with model -dimensional keys, values and queries, we found it beneficial to linearly project the queries, keys and values h times with different, learned linear projections to dk , dk and dv dimensions, respectively.
On each of these projected versions of queries, keys and values we then perform the attention function in parallel, yielding dv -dimensional output values. These are concatenated and once again projected, resulting in the final values, as depicted in Figure .

Multi-head attention allows the model to jointly attend to information from different representation subspaces at different positions. With a single attention head, averaging inhibits this.

MultiHead(Q, K, V) &= Concat(head1, ..., headh)WO

where headi &= Attention(QW^Qi, KW^Ki, VW^Vi)

Where the projections are parameter matrices W^Qi R , W^Ki R , W^Vi R and WO R .

In this work we employ h=8 parallel attention layers, or heads. For each of these we use dk=dv=model/h=64 .
Due to the reduced dimension of each head, the total computational cost is similar to that of single-head attention with full dimensionality.

Applications of Attention in our Model.

The Transformer uses multi-head attention in three different ways:

In "encoder-decoder attention" layers, the queries come from the previous decoder layer, and the memory keys and values come from the output of the encoder. This allows every position in the decoder to attend over all positions in the input sequence. This mimics the typical encoder-decoder attention mechanisms in sequence-to-sequence models such as .

The encoder contains self-attention layers. In a self-attention layer all of the keys, values and queries come from the same place, in this case, the output of the previous layer in the encoder. Each position in the encoder can attend to all positions in the previous layer of the encoder.

Similarly, self-attention layers in the decoder allow each position in the decoder to attend to all positions in the decoder up to and including that position. We need to prevent leftward information flow in the decoder to preserve the auto-regressive property. We implement this inside of scaled dot-product attention by masking out (setting to - ) all values in the input of the softmax which correspond to illegal connections. See Figure .

Position-wise Feed-Forward Networks.

In addition to attention sub-layers, each of the layers in our encoder and decoder contains a fully connected feed-forward network, which is applied to each position separately and identically. This consists of two linear transformations with a ReLU activation in between.

FFN(x)= (0, xW1 + b1) W2 + b2

While the linear transformations are the same across different positions, they use different parameters from layer to layer. Another way of describing this is as two convolutions with kernel size 1. The dimensionality of input and output is model=512 , and the inner-layer has dimensionality d=2048 .

Embeddings and Softmax.

Similarly to other sequence transduction models, we use learned embeddings to convert the input tokens and output tokens to vectors of dimension model . We also use the usual learned linear transformation and softmax function to convert the decoder output to predicted next-token probabilities. In our model, we share the same weight matrix between the two embedding layers and the pre-softmax linear transformation, similar to . In the embedding layers, we multiply those weights by model .

Positional Encoding.

Since our model contains no recurrence and no convolution, in order for the model to make use of the order of the sequence, we must inject some information about the relative or absolute position of the tokens in the sequence. To this end, we add "positional encodings" to the input embeddings at the bottoms of the encoder and decoder stacks. The positional encodings have the same dimension model as the embeddings, so that the two can be summed. There are many choices of positional encodings, learned and fixed .

In this work, we use sine and cosine functions of different frequencies:

PE = sin(pos / 10000)
PE = cos(pos / 10000)

where pos is the position and i is the dimension. That is, each dimension of the positional encoding corresponds to a sinusoid. The wavelengths form a geometric progression from 2 to 10000 dot 2 . We chose this function because we hypothesized it would allow the model to easily learn to attend by relative positions, since for any fixed offset k , PE can be represented as a linear function of PE .

We also experimented with using learned positional embeddings instead, and found that the two versions produced nearly identical results (see Table row (E)). We chose the sinusoidal version because it may allow the model to extrapolate to sequence lengths longer than the ones encountered during training.

Why Self-Attention.

In this section we compare various aspects of self-attention layers to the recurrent and convolutional layers commonly used for mapping one variable-length sequence of symbol representations (x1, ..., xn) to another sequence of equal length (z1, ..., zn) , with xi, zi Rd , such as a hidden layer in a typical sequence transduction encoder or decoder. Motivating our use of self-attention we consider three desiderata.

One is the total computational complexity per layer.
Another is the amount of computation that can be parallelized, as measured by the minimum number of sequential operations required.

The third is the path length between long-range dependencies in the network. Learning long-range dependencies is a key challenge in many sequence transduction tasks. One key factor affecting the ability to learn such dependencies is the length of the paths forward and backward signals have to traverse in the network. The shorter these paths between any combination of positions in the input and output sequences, the easier it is to learn long-range dependencies . Hence we also compare the maximum path length between any two input and output positions in networks composed of the different layer types.

As noted in Table , a self-attention layer connects all positions with a constant number of sequentially executed operations, whereas a recurrent layer requires O(n) sequential operations.
In terms of computational complexity, self-attention layers are faster than recurrent layers when the sequence length n is smaller than the representation dimensionality d , which is most often the case with sentence representations used by state-of-the-art models in machine translations, such as word-piece and byte-pair representations.
To improve computational performance for tasks involving very long sequences, self-attention could be restricted to considering only a neighborhood of size r in the input sequence centered around the respective output position. This would increase the maximum path length to O(n/r) . We plan to investigate this approach further in future work.

A single convolutional layer with kernel width k < n does not connect all pairs of input and output positions. Doing so requires a stack of O(n/k) convolutional layers in the case of contiguous kernels, or O(logk(n)) in the case of dilated convolutions , increasing the length of the longest paths between any two positions in the network.
Convolutional layers are generally more expensive than recurrent layers, by a factor of k . Separable convolutions , however, decrease the complexity considerably, to O(k dot n dot d + n dot d2) . Even with k=n , however, the complexity of a separable convolution is equal to the combination of a self-attention layer and a point-wise feed-forward layer, the approach we take in our model.

As side benefit, self-attention could yield more interpretable models. We inspect attention distributions from our models and present and discuss examples in the appendix. Not only do individual attention heads clearly learn to perform different tasks, many appear to exhibit behavior related to the syntactic and semantic structure of the sentences.

Training.

This section describes the training regime for our models.

Training Data and Batching.

We trained on the standard WMT 2014 English-German dataset consisting of about 4.5 million sentence pairs. Sentences were encoded using byte-pair encoding , which has a shared source-target vocabulary of about 37000 tokens. For English-French, we used the significantly larger WMT 2014 English-French dataset consisting of 36M sentences and split tokens into a 32000 word-piece vocabulary . Sentence pairs were batched together by approximate sequence length. Each training batch contained a set of sentence pairs containing approximately 25000 source tokens and 25000 target tokens.

Hardware and Schedule.

We trained our models on one machine with 8 NVIDIA P100 GPUs. For our base models using the hyperparameters described throughout the paper, each training step took about 0.4 seconds. We trained the base models for a total of 100,000 steps or 12 hours. For our big models,(described on the bottom line of table ), step time was 1.0 seconds. The big models were trained for 300,000 steps (3.5 days).

Optimizer We used the Adam optimizer with 1=0.9 , 2=0.98 and =10 . We varied the learning rate over the course of training, according to the formula:.

lrate = model dot
(step\_num,
step\_num dot warmup\_steps)

This corresponds to increasing the learning rate linearly for the first warmup\_steps training steps, and decreasing it thereafter proportionally to the inverse square root of the step number. We used warmup\_steps=4000 .

Regularization.

We employ three types of regularization during training:

Residual Dropout We apply dropout to the output of each sub-layer, before it is added to the sub-layer input and normalized. In addition, we apply dropout to the sums of the embeddings and the positional encodings in both the encoder and decoder stacks. For the base model, we use a rate of P=0.1 ..

Label Smoothing During training, we employed label smoothing of value =0.1 . This hurts perplexity, as the model learns to be more unsure, but improves accuracy and BLEU score..

SECTION_START Results SECTION_END Machine Translation.

On the WMT 2014 English-to-German translation task, the big transformer model (Transformer (big) in Table ) outperforms the best previously reported models (including ensembles) by more than 2.0 BLEU, establishing a new state-of-the-art BLEU score of 28.4 . The configuration of this model is listed in the bottom line of Table . Training took 3.5 days on 8 P100 GPUs. Even our base model surpasses all previously published models and ensembles, at a fraction of the training cost of any of the competitive models.

On the WMT 2014 English-to-French translation task, our big model achieves a BLEU score of 41.0 , outperforming all of the previously published single models, at less than 1/4 the training cost of the previous state-of-the-art model. The Transformer (big) model trained for English-to-French used dropout rate P=0.1 , instead of 0.3 .

For the base models, we used a single model obtained by averaging the last 5 checkpoints, which were written at 10-minute intervals. For the big models, we averaged the last 20 checkpoints. We used beam search with a beam size of 4 and length penalty =0.6 . These hyperparameters were chosen after experimentation on the development set. We set the maximum output length during inference to input length + 50 , but terminate early when possible .

Table summarizes our results and compares our translation quality and training costs to other model architectures from the literature. We estimate the number of floating point operations used to train a model by multiplying the training time, the number of GPUs used, and an estimate of the sustained single-precision floating-point capacity of each GPU .

Model Variations.

To evaluate the importance of different components of the Transformer, we varied our base model in different ways, measuring the change in performance on English-to-German translation on the development set, newstest2013. We used beam search as described in the previous section, but no checkpoint averaging. We present these results in Table .

In Table rows (A), we vary the number of attention heads and the attention key and value dimensions, keeping the amount of computation constant, as described in Section . While single-head attention is 0.9 BLEU worse than the best setting, quality also drops off with too many heads.

In Table rows (B), we observe that reducing the attention key size dk hurts model quality. This suggests that determining compatibility is not easy and that a more sophisticated compatibility function than dot product may be beneficial. We further observe in rows (C) and (D) that, as expected, bigger models are better, and dropout is very helpful in avoiding over-fitting. In row (E) we replace our sinusoidal positional encoding with learned positional embeddings , and observe nearly identical results to the base model.

English Constituency Parsing.

To evaluate if the Transformer can generalize to other tasks we performed experiments on English constituency parsing. This task presents specific challenges: the output is subject to strong structural constraints and is significantly longer than the input.
Furthermore, RNN sequence-to-sequence models have not been able to attain state-of-the-art results in small-data regimes .

We trained a 4-layer transformer with d = 1024 on the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) portion of the Penn Treebank , about 40K training sentences. We also trained it in a semi-supervised setting, using the larger high-confidence and BerkleyParser corpora from with approximately 17M sentences . We used a vocabulary of 16K tokens for the WSJ only setting and a vocabulary of 32K tokens for the semi-supervised setting.

We performed only a small number of experiments to select the dropout, both attention and residual (section ), learning rates and beam size on the Section 22 development set, all other parameters remained unchanged from the English-to-German base translation model. During inference, we increased the maximum output length to input length + 300 . We used a beam size of 21 and =0.3 for both WSJ only and the semi-supervised setting.

Our results in Table show that despite the lack of task-specific tuning our model performs surprisingly well, yielding better results than all previously reported models with the exception of the Recurrent Neural Network Grammar .

In contrast to RNN sequence-to-sequence models , the Transformer outperforms the BerkeleyParser even when training only on the WSJ training set of 40K sentences.

Conclusion.

In this work, we presented the Transformer, the first sequence transduction model based entirely on attention, replacing the recurrent layers most commonly used in encoder-decoder architectures with multi-headed self-attention.

For translation tasks, the Transformer can be trained significantly faster than architectures based on recurrent or convolutional layers. On both WMT 2014 English-to-German and WMT 2014 English-to-French translation tasks, we achieve a new state of the art. In the former task our best model outperforms even all previously reported ensembles.

We are excited about the future of attention-based models and plan to apply them to other tasks. We plan to extend the Transformer to problems involving input and output modalities other than text and to investigate local, restricted attention mechanisms to efficiently handle large inputs and outputs such as images, audio and video.
Making generation less sequential is another research goals of ours.

The code we used to train and evaluate our models is available at .

Acknowledgements We are grateful to Nal Kalchbrenner and Stephan Gouws for.

their fruitful comments, corrections and inspiration.

10

layernorm2016
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton.
Layer normalization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

bahdanau2014neural
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio.
Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
translate.
CoRR, abs/1409.0473, 2014.

DBLP:journals/corr/BritzGLL17
Denny Britz, Anna Goldie, Minh-Thang Luong, and Quoc V. Le.
Massive exploration of neural machine translation architectures.
CoRR, abs/1703.03906, 2017.

cheng2016long
Jianpeng Cheng, Li Dong, and Mirella Lapata.
Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06733, 2016.

cho2014learning
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Fethi Bougares, Holger
Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio.
Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
statistical machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1406.1078, 2014.

xception2016
Francois Chollet.
Xception: Deep learning with depthwise separable convolutions.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02357, 2016.

gruEval14
Junyoung Chung, Çaglar Gülçehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua
Bengio.
Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence
modeling.
CoRR, abs/1412.3555, 2014.

dyer-rnng:16
Chris Dyer, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Miguel Ballesteros, and Noah A. Smith.
Recurrent neural network grammars.
In Proc. of NAACL, 2016.

JonasFaceNet2017
Jonas Gehring, Michael Auli, David Grangier, Denis Yarats, and Yann N. Dauphin.
Convolutional sequence to sequence learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03122v2, 2017.

graves2013generating
Alex Graves.
Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0850, 2013.

he2016deep
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 770--778, 2016.

hochreiter2001gradient
Sepp Hochreiter, Yoshua Bengio, Paolo Frasconi, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
Gradient flow in recurrent nets: the difficulty of learning long-term
dependencies, 2001.

hochreiter1997
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
Long short-term memory.
Neural computation, 9(8):1735--1780, 1997.

huang-harper:2009:EMNLP
Zhongqiang Huang and Mary Harper.
Self-training PCFG grammars with latent annotations across
languages.
In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 832--841. ACL, August 2009.

jozefowicz2016exploring
Rafal Jozefowicz, Oriol Vinyals, Mike Schuster, Noam Shazeer, and Yonghui Wu.
Exploring the limits of language modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02410, 2016.

extendedngpu
Łukasz Kaiser and Samy Bengio.
Can active memory replace attention?
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, (NIPS),
2016.

neural_gpu
Łukasz Kaiser and Ilya Sutskever.
Neural GPUs learn algorithms.
In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2016.

NalBytenet2017
Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Karen Simonyan, Aaron van den Oord, Alex
Graves, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
Neural machine translation in linear time.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.10099v2, 2017.

structuredAttentionNetworks
Yoon Kim, Carl Denton, Luong Hoang, and Alexander M. Rush.
Structured attention networks.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.

kingma2014adam
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
In ICLR, 2015.

Kuchaiev2017Factorization
Oleksii Kuchaiev and Boris Ginsburg.
Factorization tricks for LSTM networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10722, 2017.

lin2017structured
Zhouhan Lin, Minwei Feng, Cicero Nogueira dos Santos, Mo Yu, Bing Xiang, Bowen
Zhou, and Yoshua Bengio.
A structured self-attentive sentence embedding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03130, 2017.

multiseq2seq
Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Lukasz Kaiser.
Multi-task sequence to sequence learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06114, 2015.

luong2015effective
Minh-Thang Luong, Hieu Pham, and Christopher D Manning.
Effective approaches to attention-based neural machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.04025, 2015.

marcus1993building
Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice Santorini.
Building a large annotated corpus of english: The penn treebank.
Computational linguistics, 19(2):313--330, 1993.

mcclosky-etAl:2006:NAACL
David McClosky, Eugene Charniak, and Mark Johnson.
Effective self-training for parsing.
In Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of
the NAACL, Main Conference, pages 152--159. ACL, June 2006.

decomposableAttnModel
Ankur Parikh, Oscar Täckström, Dipanjan Das, and Jakob Uszkoreit.
A decomposable attention model.
In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2016.

paulus2017deep
Romain Paulus, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher.
A deep reinforced model for abstractive summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04304, 2017.

petrov-EtAl:2006:ACL
Slav Petrov, Leon Barrett, Romain Thibaux, and Dan Klein.
Learning accurate, compact, and interpretable tree annotation.
In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages
433--440. ACL, July 2006.

press2016using
Ofir Press and Lior Wolf.
Using the output embedding to improve language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.05859, 2016.

sennrich2015neural
Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.07909, 2015.

shazeer2017outrageously
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le,
Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean.
Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated
mixture-of-experts layer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.

srivastava2014dropout
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey E Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and
Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):1929--1958, 2014.

sukhbaatar2015
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Arthur Szlam, Jason Weston, and Rob Fergus.
End-to-end memory networks.
In C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, D. D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, and R. Garnett,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 28, pages
2440--2448. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015.

sutskever14
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc VV Le.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
3104--3112, 2014.

DBLP:journals/corr/SzegedyVISW15
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jonathon Shlens, and
Zbigniew Wojna.
Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision.
CoRR, abs/1512.00567, 2015.

KVparse15
Vinyals \& Kaiser, Koo, Petrov, Sutskever, and Hinton.
Grammar as a foreign language.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.

wu2016google
Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang
Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al.
Google's neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between
human and machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.

DBLP:journals/corr/ZhouCWLX16
Jie Zhou, Ying Cao, Xuguang Wang, Peng Li, and Wei Xu.
Deep recurrent models with fast-forward connections for neural
machine translation.
CoRR, abs/1606.04199, 2016.

zhu-EtAl:2013:ACL
Muhua Zhu, Yue Zhang, Wenliang Chen, Min Zhang, and Jingbo Zhu.
Fast and accurate shift-reduce constituent parsing.
In Proceedings of the 51st Annual Meeting of the ACL (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 434--443. ACL, August 2013.

Attention Visualizations.

Two Feed-Forward Layers = Attention over Parameters.

In addition to attention layers, our model contains position-wise feed-forward networks (Section ), which consist of two linear transformations with a ReLU activation in between. In fact, these networks too can be seen as a form of attention. Compare the formula for such a network with the formula for a simple dot-product attention layer (biases and scaling factors omitted):

FFN(x, W1, W2) = ReLU(xW1)W2
A(q, K, V) = Softmax(qKT)V

Based on the similarity of these formulae, the two-layer feed-forward network can be seen as a kind of attention, where the keys and values are the rows of the trainable parameter matrices W1 and W2 , and where we use ReLU instead of Softmax in the compatibility function.

Given this similarity, we experimented with replacing the position-wise feed-forward networks with attention layers similar to the ones we use everywhere else our model. The multi-head-attention-over-parameters sublayer is identical to the multi-head attention described in , except that the "keys" and "values" inputs to each attention head are trainable model parameters, as opposed to being linear projections of a previous layer. These parameters are scaled up by a factor of d in order to be more similar to activations.

In our first experiment, we replaced each position-wise feed-forward network with a multi-head-attention-over-parameters sublayer with hp=8 heads, key-dimensionality d=64 , and value-dimensionality d=64 , using np=1536 key-value pairs for each attention head. The sublayer has a total of 2097152 parameters, including the parameters in the query projection and the output projection. This matches the number of parameters in the position-wise feed-forward network that we replaced. While the theoretical amount of computation is also the same, in practice, the attention version caused the step times to be about 30\

In our second experiment, we used hp=8 heads, and np=512 key-value pairs for each attention head, again matching the total number of parameters in the base model.

Results for the first experiment were slightly worse than for the base model, and results for the second experiment were slightly better, see Table .

In Section , we introduced Scaled dot-product attention, where we scale down the dot products by dk . In this section, we will give a rough justification of this scaling factor. If we assume that q and k are dk -dimensional vectors whose components are independent random variables with mean 0 and variance 1 , then their dot product, q dot k = u_ivi , has mean 0 and variance dk . Since we would prefer these values to have variance 1 , we divide by dk .

In this section, we will give a rough justification of this scaling factor, that is, we will show that for any two vectors, ěcu and ěcv , whose variance and mean are 1 and 0 respectively, the variance and the mean of the dot product are dk and 0 respectively. Therefore, dividing by dk ensures that each component of the attention logits are normalized. The repeated layer norms at each transformer layer encourage ěcu and ěcv to be normalized.

E & = E &By linearity of expectation
& = EE & Assuming independence
& = 0

E)2] & = E - E2
& = E
& = E E &By linearity of expectation and indepedence
& = dk

Thanks for listening. This has been an audio narration of Attention Is All You Need. Published June 2017. By Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, and 5 more authors. This paper was narrated by un. archive dot org, a project by Sean Ahrens. un. archive.org lets you listen to archive papers for free. Simply visit a paper on archive, strangely spelled; A; R; X; I; V; dot org, then pre pend the letters; U; N; to the domain name, spelling un; archive.org