Abstraction as a Memory-Efficient Inductive Bias for Continual Learning.

By Elnaz Rahmati, Nona Ghazizadeh, Zhivar Sourati, and 2 more authors.

Published on March 17, 2026.

Abstract The real world is non-stationary and infinitely complex, requiring intelligent agents to learn continually without the prohibitive cost of retraining from scratch. While online continual learning offers a framework for this setting, learning new information often interferes with previously acquired knowledge, causes forgetting and degraded generalization. To address this, we propose Abstraction-Augmented Training (AAT), a loss-level modification encouraging models to capture the latent relational structure shared across examples. By jointly optimizing over concrete instances and their abstract representations, AAT introduces a memory-efficient inductive bias that stabilizes learning in strictly online data streams, eliminating the need for a replay buffer. To capture the multi-faceted nature of abstraction, we introduce and evaluate AAT on two benchmarks: a controlled relational dataset where abstraction is realized through entity masking, and a narrative dataset where abstraction is expressed through shared proverbs. Our results show that AAT achieves performance comparable to or exceeding strong experience replay (ER) baselines, despite requiring zero additional memory and only minimal changes to the training objective. This work highlights structural abstraction as a powerful, memory-free alternative to ER.

Introduction Language models are pre-trained on data collected up to a fixed point in time, yet real-world information continues to evolve. Retraining models from scratch as new data becomes available is computationally expensive and impractical, motivating continual learning approaches that allow models to incorporate new information over time. In practice, however, continually training models on nonstationary data streams introduces two fundamental challenges: catastrophic forgetting, where previously learned knowledge is overwritten, and plasticity loss, where the model’s ability to adapt to new information degrades over time. Catastrophic forgetting has been extensively studied and remains a central challenge in continual learning (Goodfellow et al., 2015; Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2019; Mirzadeh et al., 2022; Tadros et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2025). More recently, plasticity loss has emerged as a complementary failure mode, highlighting that models may become increasingly rigid as training progresses (Lyle et al., 2023; Dohare et al., 2024; Farias and Jozefiak, 2025; Lewandowski et al., 2025; Ahn et al., 2025). Existing methods often address these issues in isolation: approaches targeting catastrophic forgetting prioritize retaining past knowledge, while methods focusing on plasticity emphasize adaptation to new tasks. Effective continual learning must balance both stability and plasticity throughout training. A wide range of continual learning methods aim to mitigate catastrophic forgetting through regularization or constrained parameter updates (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018), while data-centric approaches such as experience replay (ER) revisit stored examples from earlier training to stabilize learning (Rolnick et al., 2019). Although regularization effectively mitigates forgetting, it often impedes the acquisition of new tasks, leading to suboptimal performance (Zhang et al., 2023). Conversely, ER is simple to apply and often highly effective, as it places relatively few constraints on model updates and preserves plasticity (Van de Ven et al., 2020; Buzzega et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2025). However, replay-based methods rely on maintaining a buffer of past data, which incurs memory overhead and becomes increasingly costly in strictly online settings. In this work, we focus on online continual learning (OCL), a challenging regime in which data arrives as a stream, task boundaries are absent, and each data point is observed only once. In this setting, storing and replaying past examples may be

undesirable or infeasible, motivating methods that stabilize learning without relying on explicit memory buffers. This challenge has a natural analogue in human learning and memory. Behavioral and theoretical work in cognitive science suggests that to overcome the limitations of instance-level learning, humans do not primarily store experiences as isolated instances, but form abstract schemas that capture common relational structures across situations (Schank and Abelson, 2013). These representations enable efficient generalization by applying knowledge learned in one context to unseen (yet similar) contexts (Gick and Holyoak, 1983; Gentner, 1983). In fact, human behavioral findings show that experiences emphasizing abstract relational structure, rather than instance-specific details, are more likely to be remembered and reused in new contexts (Clement et al., 1994). Consistent with these findings, work in cognitive neuroscience suggests that, when events are represented in the brain, learning tends to organize experiences around components shared across related events (Masís-Obando et al., 2022). Such representations support replay at multiple levels of abstraction, enabling stable learning, generalization, and decision making (Mattar and Daw, 2018). From an optimization perspective, abstraction emphasizes shared structure across examples while suppressing instance-specific variation, suggesting a natural mechanism for reducing interference in continual learning. Importantly, such abstract relational representations that underlie key aspects of human intelligence (Hofstadter et al., 2001) are often difficult to acquire and require appropriate representational support to be learned and retained (Gentner, 2003). Motivated by this principle, we introduce Abstraction-Augmented Training (AAT), a simple and memory-efficient inductive bias for OCL. AAT introduces a lightweight loss-level modification that jointly optimizes over a concrete instance and its corresponding abstraction when the instance is first encountered, biasing learning toward the abstract representations shared across examples. To ensure effective learning in the strictly online regime, we additionally employ a small number of local replays, allowing the model to consolidate new information before progressing through the data stream. Importantly, AAT does not store or replay past data beyond the current instance. To evaluate AAT in a controlled setting, we introduce the Relational Cycle Benchmark, derived from knowledge graphs to model the continual arrival of real-world information. Each example is a connected graph of entities and relations containing at least one undirected cycle, with a derivable edge withheld from training to assess relational reasoning and generalization throughout learning. In this benchmark, abstraction is instantiated through entity masking. Since abstraction can take multiple forms, we further introduce a second benchmark, Narrative Abstraction Benchmark, based on stories and proverbs, to evaluate AAT in a setting where abstraction is expressed through shared narrative structure rather than surface-level similarities. We provide an intuitive theoretical analysis illustrating how abstraction can reduce gradient interference and promote stable learning in OCL. We further analyze training dynamics and final performance across the introduced benchmarks, demonstrating that AAT outperforms standard instanceonly learning and matches or exceeds ER baselines. Overall, this work makes three contributions: (i) a lightweight, loss-level abstraction mechanism for OCL that does not rely on stored replay buffers; (ii) two new benchmarks designed to disentangle factual retention from structural generalization; and (iii) empirical and theoretical evidence that abstraction provides an effective and memory-efficient inductive bias for learning and generalization.

Method Large Language Models (LLMs) are typically pretrained on temporally static datasets. While retraining from scratch remains the standard approach for integrating new information, its computational cost is often prohibitive. OCL provides a more efficient alternative by treating learning as a continuous process without explicit task boundaries. Specifically, we consider a data stream D = {d1, d2,..., dm} where each instance is observed only once. We formalize this by assuming that at each training step i, the model πi encounters a batch of data bi = {di B}. The objective is to maximize performance on the current batch bi while minimizing forgetting on the historical data Si−1 k=1 bk. In the following sections, we introduce AAT, followed by a theoretical analysis of its stability.

Abstraction-Augmented Online Learning Existing works on OCL for LLMs often simulate data streams using knowledge graphs, presenting new entities and their relations in each instance (Jang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023). Fine-tuning LLMs on such data creates a tension between

instance-level memorization and structural generalization; entity-specific surface features can dominate the learning signal, overwriting parameters encoding broader relational dependencies. Consequently, models may successfully recall training instances while losing the shared structures necessary for inductive reasoning. To address this, we propose that models must balance encoding specific entities/relations with learning the shared structural representations that govern them. We draw inspiration from Structure Mapping Theory (Gentner, 1983) and theory-based categorization (Murphy and Medin, 1985), which suggests that human analogical reasoning relies on mapping relations across domains by abstracting away from surface-level attributes. From an optimization perspective, abstraction suppresses entity-specific gradients and encourages updates aligned with underlying relational structure, thereby reducing catastrophic interference across samples. AAT integrates this via a dual-objective loss function and local replay (see Algorithm 1). In OCL, the model encounters each data batch exactly once (that is,, the number of epochs is set to one). Because information-dense batches may not be fully learned in one update, we introduce a local replay count n (where n ∈), allowing multiple optimization steps per batch. During the initial exposure to a batch, the model is presented with both a concrete instance (xinst) and its corresponding symbolic abstraction (xabs). The abstraction biases the update toward representations invariant to noisy entities. The effect of the abstraction on the loss is controlled by the hyperparameter α, defaulting to 0.5. Subsequent n −1 local replays reinforce the specific concrete instance, retaining factual details while preventing entity-specific gradients from dominating the learning signal. This balances both instance-level knowledge and abstract relational structure while mitigating interference.

Effect of Abstraction on Optimization We provide an intuitive theoretical explanation for why abstraction can improve performance in the OCL setting. The key idea is that abstraction suppresses entity-specific gradient components while amplifying updates that correspond to shared relational structure. Consider a model that predicts relations from an input paragraph x using an encoder ϕθ(·) followed by a linear head W: fθ(x) = Wϕθ(x). Algorithm 1 Abstraction-Augmented Training 1: Input: Dataset D, initial parameters θ, abstraction ratio α, local replay count n, learning rate η. 2: for each batch B ⊂D do 3: for j = 0 to n −1 do 4: ˆyinst ←π(xinst; θ) // Instance forward pass 5: ˆyabs ←π(xabs; θ) // Abstract forward pass 6: if j = 0 then 7: L(θ) ←α · NLL(ˆyabs, yabs) + (1 −α) · NLL(ˆyinst, yinst) // Combined loss 8: else 9: L(θ) ←NLL(ˆyinst, yinst) // Instance loss 10: end if 11: θ ←Adam(∇θL(θ), θ, η) // Parameters update 12: end for 13: end for Each example contains two sources of information: (i) relational structure r and (ii) entity identities e1,..., ek. We decompose the representation as follows where ϕr encodes structural relational features shared across samples, while ϕe encodes instance-specific entity signals ϕθ(x) = ϕr(r) + ϕe(e1,..., ek). For an instance i, the loss and its gradient are Li = ℓ  W(ϕ(i) r + ϕ(i) e ), yi , ∇θLi ∝W ⊤∇ℓ· (∇θϕ(i) r + ∇θϕ(i) e ). In OCL, ϕe varies dramatically across samples due to different entities, leading to high gradient variance and destructive interference between consecutive updates. Under entity masking, the abstract input removes entity identity, yielding ˜ϕθ(x) = ϕr(r). The abstraction loss and its effective gradient therefore are ˜Li = ℓ(Wϕ(i) r, yi), ∇θLtotal i ∝W ⊤∇ℓ· h (1 + α)∇θϕ(i) r + ∇θϕ(i) e i. Since ϕr is shared across examples while ϕe is highly instance-specific, abstraction reweights the optimization toward low-variance structural components increasing gradient alignment across batches and mitigating the instability that drives forgetting. ER stabilizes training by revisiting past examples. AAT achieves a similar effect using abstracts. By collapsing many entity-specific samples into a shared symbolic template, each update reinforces a broader equivalence class of relational patterns. This acts as a regularizer that preserves previously learned relational structure even as new entity instances arrive. Abstraction improves OCL

by amplifying shared relational gradients, suppressing instance-specific noise, and implicitly replaying structural templates across samples. Together, these effects reduce interference and promote stable accumulation of relational knowledge.

Benchmarks Evaluating abstraction in OCL requires probing relational structure acquisition as well as factual retention. Existing benchmarks rarely capture settings where unobserved relations must be inferred from interconnected entities. To address this, we introduce two benchmarks that disentangle factual memory from structural generalization: a controlled relational dataset and a narrative dataset requiring high-level relational inference.

Relational Cycle Benchmark RCB is a dataset designed to probe both factual retention and deductive generalization. RCB is constructed from a curated “Relation Bank” consisting of {entity1, relation, entity2} triples. Entities are instantiated as placeholders, and relations span eight semantic domains: genealogy, profession, arts, science, music, history, geopolitics, and sports. From this bank, we define 51 distinct relational typologies, each corresponding to a small relational subgraph. Abstraction in this data is defined through masking entities, ensuring the model focuses on the underlying relational patterns rather than specific surface-level entities. Each typology contains at least three relations arranged to form an undirected cycle. In 60% of typologies, the cycle corresponds to an explicit logical dependency in which one relation is strictly entailed by the conjunction of the others. For example, the relations {MOTHER(Sarah, John), MOTHER(Sarah, Jane)} entail SIBLING(John, Jane). For the other typologies, where no entailment is identified under our rule set, we randomly select one edge in the cycle to serve as the held-out relation. We populate each typology with approximately 25 instances by instantiating the same relational structure with entirely different entities, sourced from Wikidata (Vrandeˇci´c and Krötzsch, 2014). In total, the dataset comprises 1,245 typology instances containing 3,295 unique entity-relation triples. For each instance, one relation is removed and treated as the unknown edge, while the remaining relations, referred to as known edges, are serialized into a natural-language paragraph. To encourage lexical diversity and reduce template overfitting, each typology is realized using multiple surface forms (for example,, “Sarah is John’s mother” vs. “John’s mother is Sarah”). These variations are generated by varying the subject-object order and aggregating multiple relations into a single sentence when they share a common subject. This benchmark presents a rigorous testing environment. Each example contains multiple relational statements, some of which act as distractors and are not directly relevant to recovering the unknown edge. This design enables a joint evaluation of retaining known relational facts during SFT, and structural generalization and reasoning required to recover the held-out relation. See Section A. for dataset statistics, examples, and baselines.

Narrative Abstraction Benchmark We introduce NAB to evaluate whether AAT remains effective when abstraction corresponds to high-level, overarching relational motifs inferred from natural language narratives even with minimal lexical or structural overlap. In NAB, abstraction corresponds to a shared relational motif between a proverb and a set of narratives that instantiate its underlying message. Each proverb encodes an abstract takeaway realized across diverse domains, entities, and event structures. Compared to RCB, this setting removes not only entity-level cues but also relational regularities, requiring models to align narratives at a more global and implicit level. To construct NAB, we start from a collection of narratives paired with their corresponding proverbs from ePiC (Ghosh and Srivastava, 2022) and expand the dataset by generating additional narratives for each proverb using a prompt-guided analogical generation procedure. The prompt design is informed by principles from Structure-Mapping Theory (Gentner, 1983), encouraging alignment at the level of abstract relational structure rather than surface form. Given a proverb and a seed narrative, the procedure produces new narratives that preserve the same abstract meaning while instantiating it in distinct surface domains. As a result, narratives associated with the same proverb share a common relational motif while differing substantially in entities, events, and surface realization. See Section A. for more details. Each narrative in NAB is further converted into a continuation comparison task. Specifically, each narrative is split into a shared narrative part and two alternative continuations, a correct ending that is consistent with the proverb’s abstract meaning,

and a distractor ending that is locally coherent but violates that abstract relation. Distractors are constructed to be plausible continuations of the narrative, ensuring that correct prediction requires abstraction rather than superficial coherence or stylistic cues. We manually verified that expanded narratives preserve the intended abstract relational structure while minimizing surface-level overlap, and that distractors are locally coherent yet violate the proverb’s abstract meaning rather than introducing trivial cues. See Section A. for more details.

Experimental Set-Up We evaluate AAT in an OCL setting, focusing on the trade-off between memorization and generalization under limited memory. This section describes the experimental protocol, baselines, and evaluation metrics used to assess online learning dynamics and final performance across benchmarks. Unless otherwise stated, all models are trained under identical optimization and data stream conditions.

Baselines As a lower-bound reference, we include standard training with the instance-level loss, corresponding to α = 0. This baseline isolates the effect of abstraction by operating exclusively on concrete examples without additional structural supervision. To evaluate performance against a stronger and adopted method, we incorporate ER with a reservoir buffer strategy. We consider two replay buffer sizes, 50 and 100, reflecting typical memory constraints in OCL. To ensure a fair comparison, we evaluate ER under two conditions, with and without local replay. When local replay is enabled, the experience replay batch is incorporated only during the first replay of each training step, regardless of the number of local replays n. Subsequent replays are applied exclusively to the current training batch. See Section A. for baseline details.

Online Evaluation Protocol In OCL, evaluating the model after every update is computationally prohibitive. We therefore adopt an interval-based protocol where the model is evaluated every k training steps. At evaluation step i (i (mod k) = 0), the metrics are computed over the cumulative set of batches encountered since the last evaluation, denoted as Bcur = Si j=i−k+1 bj, and the full history Hi = Si−k j=1 bj. For all metrics, we define correctness in RCB based on the model’s predictive confidence. Given a triple (e1, r, e2) serialized into a natural language prompt, let P(πi(e2 | e1, r)) be the model’s confidence in generating the target entity e2. An instance d is considered correct if P(πi(e2 | e1, r)) > τ, where τ is a predefined threshold. For NAB, the model is evaluated by comparing the conditional log-likelihood assigned to each candidate ending given the same narrative. An instance is considered correct if the likelihood of the correct ending exceeds that of the distractor. We define the indicator function I(πi(d)) to be 1 if the prediction is correct and 0 otherwise. Online Accuracy (Acconline). To monitor the model’s plasticity, we measure its ability to acquire recent information by calculate accuracy over all batches accumulated since the previous evaluation: Acconline(i) = ( X d∈Bcur I(πi(d))) / |Bcur| (1) Forgetting (F). Forgetting quantifies the model’s stability by tracking the loss of previously acquired knowledge. We consider an instance d to be forgotten if it was correctly predicted at a prior evaluation step t < i but is predicted incorrectly at the current step i. We normalize this by the set of instances the model learned at least once: F(i) = |{d ∈Hi | I(πi(d)) = 0 ∧∃t < i: I(πt(d) = 1)}| / |{d ∈Hi | ∃t < i: I(πt(d) = 1)}| (2) Cumulative Accuracy (Acccumul). Cumulative accuracy provides a global view of the model’s knowledge base. It captures backward transfer, as learning new relational structures may clarify previously forgotten edges from earlier batches. It is calculated over the full history up to step i: Acccumul(i) = ( X d∈Si j=1 bj I(πi(d))) / | i[ j=1 bj| (3)

Experiments & Ablations In following experiments, we use a Qwen2.5-1.5B (Team, 2024) backbone model trained with a language modeling objective. Unless otherwise specified, AAT is configured with an abstraction loss weight of α = 0. and a local replay count of n = 5 (implementation details in Section A.2). We first examine the impact of abstraction on online training dynamics by tracking forgetting rate and online accuracy throughout training on the RCB dataset reporting results separately for known and unknown edges. Paragraphs describing known edges are used for training. This analysis

provides insight into the trade-off between memorization and generalization when learning new information. Furthermore, to empirically validate the theoretical claim that abstraction reduces gradient variance, we perform a loss landscape analysis using linear interpolation in model weight space (Li et al., 2018). We compare the landscape geometry of normal SFT and AAT by measuring the variance and coefficient of variation (CV) of the loss surface along the primary training trajectory. The trajectory is defined by an interpolation axis α ∈[−0.5, 1.5], where α = 0 corresponds to the start of training and α = 1 to the end of training, and a perpendicular axis β ∈[−0.3, 0.3]. Next, we compare AAT against normal SFT and ER to evaluate how closely abstraction can match the performance of replaying actual instances. We report cumulative accuracy at the final training step (Acccumul), step-averaged online accuracy (Acconline), and forgetting (F), measured separately for known and unknown edges. In addition to Qwen2.5-1.5B, we also train SmolLM-1.7B (Allal et al., 2025) to evaluate whether AAT generalizes across model families with substantially different pretraining procedures. We then conduct ablations to analyze the role of abstraction level in AAT. In addition to entity masking, we consider category-based abstraction in which entities are replaced with their semantic categories (for example,, city, institution, or person). As a control, we also construct random abstracts by combining entity-masked sentences that contain the same number of relations as the original abstract. To evaluate whether AAT generalizes to different types of abstraction, we report performance on the NAB dataset under normal SFT, ER, and AAT. As this dataset is less information-dense, we use n = 1 and α = 0. for AAT; all baselines are evaluated with n = 1. For each proverb, 90% of narratives are used for training (marked as known at evaluation), while the remaining 10% are held out as unknown. Additional ablations examining sensitivity to AAT hyperparameters (abstraction weight α and local replay count n) and robustness to data order are reported in Section A.1.

Results In this section, we analyze training dynamics, compare AAT against baselines, and evaluate generalization across datasets and abstraction levels.

Training Behavior As shown in Figure 1, both normal SFT and AAT exhibit similar high-level behavior. Specifically, there is an initial spike in forgetting corresponding to the introduction of a new domain, followed by a gradual stabilization. For known edges, forgetting decreases and then plateaus, while for unknown edges, it continues to decrease. Online accuracy follows a complementary pattern. Accuracy on known edges initially rises and then declines, while accuracy on unknown edges increases substantially. A similar shift occurs later in training (around step 60), where known-edge accuracy recovers as unknown-edge accuracy decreases. Importantly, both edge types involve newly introduced entities; the distinction is whether the relation is explicitly observed or must be inferred. These dynamics reflect a trade-off between fitting instancelevel supervision and learning relational structure that supports inductive generalization. Despite these shared trends, AAT consistently exhibits lower forgetting and higher online accuracy, particularly on unknown edges and during the early stages of training on known edges. Notably, these gains arise even though AAT operates in a strictly online regime without storing or replaying past examples. This suggests that abstraction provides a stabilizing signal that mitigates interference and supports the accumulation of relational knowledge without explicit memory buffers. This stabilization can be explained by the geometry of the loss landscape. The abstract loss regularizes optimization toward smoother regions, reducing loss surface variance by 17.00% and lowering the coefficient of variation from 0.1549 to 0.1375.

Model Method Accunknown online Accknown online Funknown Fknown Accunknown cumul Accknown cumul Accall cumul Normal SFT

Buffer-50-lp1

Qwen Buffer-100-lp1

Buffer-50-lp5

Buffer-100-lp5

AAT

Normal SFT

SmolLM Buffer-100-lp5

AAT

Along the training trajectory, abstract loss improves by an average of 0.243 nats (up to 0.427), while adverse effects remain small (0.038 nats). Although absolute loss is marginally higher (2.64% on average), the resulting landscape exhibits smoother gradients and fewer sharp interactions between parameters. These results suggest that abstraction acts as an implicit regularizer, guiding optimization toward more stable regions of the loss surface and reducing interference during continual learning.

Comparison with Baselines Performance of all training methods on RCB is shown in Table 1. Relative to normal SFT, AAT improves performance across all reported metrics, increasing cumulative accuracy over all edges by 2.05%. This demonstrates that abstraction provides consistent benefits beyond instance-only optimization in the online setting. Experience replay substantially improves performance when combined with local replay, and larger buffers reduce forgetting at the cost of increased memory usage. While a buffer of size 100 achieves the lowest forgetting, a smaller buffer of size 50 attains higher online accuracy, leading to comparable cumulative accuracy between the two configurations. Despite operating without any stored replay buffer, AAT achieves performance comparable to, and in some cases exceeding, the strongest experience replay baseline. In particular, AAT improves cumulative accuracy across all edges by 0.64% relative to the best ER configuration. This improvement is driven by a substantial 6.3% gain on unknown edges, indicating stronger inductive generalization over latent relational structure, while incurring only a modest 1.14% decrease on known edges. These results suggest that AAT achieves a more favorable balance between plasticity and stability by promoting structural generalization, rather than by memorizing past instances. Results on SmolLM show a similar but stronger trend. AAT consistently outperforms both normal SFT and experience replay across nearly all metrics. Relative to normal SFT, AAT improves cumulative accuracy over all edges by 5.76% while reducing forgetting by 80% on unknown edges and 37.34% on known edges. Compared to the replay baseline, AAT further improves cumulative accuracy by 0.92% and achieves the lowest forgetting overall, indicating that abstraction alone can support both stability and generalization in this model. Importantly, the consistent improvements across both Qwen and SmolLM suggest that abstraction-based training captures a model-agnostic inductive bias that supports continual learning. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that a simple loss-level abstraction mechanism can match the benefits of replay-based methods without incurring their memory overhead. By emphasizing shared relational structure during training, AAT provides an efficient and lightweight alternative to experience replay for online continual learning.

Comparison of Abstraction Levels Table 2 compares different abstraction levels. Random abstraction performs substantially worse than structured abstractions, achieving lower cumulative accuracy and higher forgetting on both known and unknown edges. Despite covering the same relations as standard abstracts throughout training, Random does not improve learning and instead degrades performance. This indicates that relational coverage alone is insufficient; how abstractions are structured and presented to the model plays a critical role. Category-based abstraction improves performance relative to Random, suggesting preserving semantic structure provides useful learning signals. However, Category consistently underperforms entity masking across metrics, indicating that partial abstraction is less effective than stronger ab-

straction. Overall, the results suggest that effective abstraction must preserve meaningful relational structure while suppressing instance-specific information. Entity masking provides the best balance, yielding the highest accuracy and lowest forgetting. Method Accknown cumul Accunknown cumul Fknown Funknown Random

Category

Mask

Generalization to Alternative Abstractions Table 3 shows performance on the NAB. While all methods achieve comparable training accuracy, AAT attains the highest unknown accuracy and the lowest forgetting for both known and unknown stories. This indicates that abstraction improves generalization to held-out narrative instances without increasing memorization of the training data. ER improves accuracy on known narratives relative to standard training but does not yield improved performance on unknown narratives, and leads to higher forgetting. This mirrors behavior observed on the RCB, where replay stabilizes instance-level learning but does not consistently preserve abstract structure. In contrast, AAT consistently reduces forgetting while maintaining competitive training accuracy. Overall, results on NAB demonstrate that the benefits of AAT are not confined to abstractions derived from explicit entity masking or controlled relational graphs. Whereas abstraction in the RCB operates at the level of symbolic relational structure, abstractions in NAB encompass higherlevel narrative regularities, such as shared moral or causal motifs. The consistent improvements across these settings suggest that AAT uses abstraction as a general training signal that promotes the acquisition and retention of shared relational structure across multiple levels of abstraction, rather than relying on any particular abstraction format or surface-level representation. Method Accknown cumul Accunknown cumul Fknown Funknown Normal SFT

Buffer-100

AAT

Related Work CL Benchmarks. Early NLP continual learning (CL) benchmarks focused on task-incremental settings with explicit boundaries (Aghajanyan et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2021; Yadav et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2023), extending to domain or language shifts (Ke et al., 2023; Castellucci et al., 2021; M’hamdi et al., 2023; Winata et al., 2023). Recent shifts toward online CL explore non-stationary streams without delimiters (Li et al., 2025) or knowledge-graph updates (Jang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023), though many such datasets lack reproducibility. Our work focuses on online acquisition of new facts from limited streams. We introduce the Relational Cycle Benchmark (RCB) and Narrative Abstraction Benchmark (NAB) to explicitly disentangle factual retention from structural generalization, a distinction often overlooked in existing fact-updating streams. CL Methods. CL methods generally utilize regularization (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018) or data-based approaches like experience replay (Ostapenko et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2024; Bellitto et al., 2024; Zhuo et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2022) to mitigate forgetting. While effective, replay relies on memory buffers that struggle to scale in strictly online regimes (Van de Ven et al., 2020). Architectural strategies, including adapters and parameter expansion, reduce interference (Gururangan et al., 2022; M’hamdi et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2024) but often require task-based transitions and continuous parameter growth. In contrast, our approach, AAT, introduces abstraction as a losslevel inductive bias. By biasing optimization toward shared relational structures at the moment of observation, we target the instance-specific gradients that drive interference without requiring extra storage or modular expansion.

Conclusion We introduced AAT, a lightweight, loss-level modification that biases online continual learning toward shared relational structure rather than instancespecific memorization. By jointly optimizing instances and their abstractions at the moment of observation, AAT reduces gradient interference and stabilizes learning in strictly online settings without relying on replay buffers. Across models and two new benchmarks capturing different forms of abstraction, the RCB and the NAB, AAT consistently improves retention and generalization, matching or outperforming strong experience replay baselines. These results position abstraction as an effective and memory-efficient inductive bias for online continual learning in non-stationary environments.

Limitations While AAT demonstrates promising results in OCL, we acknowledge several limitations. First, our empirical evaluation is confined to relatively small models; whether the inductive bias introduced by AAT scales effectively to significantly larger language models remains an area for future research. Second, the abstractions within our introduced benchmarks, RCB and NAB, rely on explicit, repetitive patterns. Future work should extend this framework to tasks and settings that share implicit linguistic structures rather than explicitly defined patterns. Finally, our optimization approach utilizes fixed hyperparameters for the abstraction loss weight (α) and the local replay count (n). Although empirically effective, developing dynamic or adaptive weighting mechanisms could further optimize the trade-off between instance-level memorization and structural generalization.

Thanks for listening. This has been an audio narration of Abstraction as a Memory-Efficient Inductive Bias for Continual Learning. By Elnaz Rahmati, Nona Ghazizadeh, Zhivar Sourati, and 2 more authors. Published on March 17, 2026. Narrated by un. archive dot org, an app made by Sean Ahrens and Claude.