Democratic Policy Development using Collective Dialogues and AI.

By Andrew Konya, Lisa Schirch, Colin Irwin, and 1 more author.

Published on November 3, 2023.

Abstract.

We design and test an efficient democratic process for developing policies that reflect informed public will. The process combines AI-enabled collective dialogues that make deliberation democratically viable at scale with bridging-based ranking for automated consensus discovery. A GPT4-powered pipeline translates points of consensus into representative policy clauses from which an initial policy is assembled. The initial policy is iteratively refined with the input of experts and the public before a final vote and evaluation. We test the process three times with the US public, developing policy guidelines for AI assistants related to medical advice, vaccine information, and wars and conflicts. We show the process can be run in two weeks with 1500+ participants for around dollar 10,000, and that it generates policy guidelines with strong public support across demographic divides. We measure 75-81 percent support for the policy guidelines overall, and no less than 70-75 percent support across demographic splits spanning age, gender, religion, race, education, and political party. Overall, this work demonstrates an end-to-end proof of concept for a process we believe can help AI labs develop common-ground policies, governing bodies break political gridlock, and diplomats accelerate peace deals.

Author contributions: Andrew developed the AI tools used in the process. Andrew, Colin, and Lisa designed and tested the process. Aviv advised on process design and implementation. Everyone contributed to this report.

Code and data available at: 

Executive Summary.

We introduce a democratic process for developing policies that reflect informed public will. The process integrates democratic inputs with subject matter expertise to yield policies optimized for both representativeness and quality. AI-augmented collective dialogues make deliberation democratically viable at scale. Bridging-based ranking enables rapid consensus discovery. GPT4-powered tools make the process efficient. Modularization makes the process reproducible.

At the heart of this process are collective dialogues on Remesh which involve participants first being educated on an issue, followed by structured text-based deliberation where participants iteratively: a) respond to open-ended prompts, b) see and evaluate each other’s responses, and c) reflect on representative perspectives. To make democratic representation possible at scale, every participant's agreement with every response is approximated from sparse evaluations using elicitation inference.

Process overview:

First, Learn public views: An initial collective dialogue elicits informed perspectives from a carefully selected representative public. Second, Create initial policy: Bridging-based ranking is used to identify points of consensus elicited during the collective dialogue. A GPT4-powered pipeline rapidly translates points of consensus into representative policy clauses from which an initial policy is assembled. Third, Expert refinement: Relevant experts refine the policy into a higher-quality version that incorporates specialists' knowledge, minimizes ambiguities, and better handles edge cases. Fourth, Public refinement: The policy is further refined to be more representative through a second collective dialogue with a representative public. Fifth, Evaluation: Public support for the final policy is assessed via a third collective dialogue with a large-scale, highly representative public. Consistency with precedent policy is estimated using GPT4.

We tested the process three times, developing policy guidelines for AI assistants related to situations involving medical advice, vaccine information, and wars and conflicts. Each process run took two weeks, cost on the order of dollar 10,000 USD, and included democratic input from 1500+ participants representative of the US population; including around 5000 text responses and nearly 100,000 votes. The resulting policy guidelines had strong support across US demographic divides: between 75-81 percent public support overall, and no less than 70-75 percent support across demographic groups spanning age, gender, religion, race, education, and political party. Zero conflicts between the policy guidelines and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were found, and a consistent relationship was estimated between individual rights and guideline clauses between 13-27 percent of the time (the rest being neutral).

AI labs and governing bodies can use this process to develop concise sets of common ground policy guidelines that bridge demographic divides and reflect what a given population wants. It is ideal for those that have to make policy decisions that impact large populations and want a democratic process to align those decisions with informed public will. However, while we view the work presented here as an end-to-end proof of concept that can be used today, it is not a perfect polished system. Every aspect of every step of the process can be critiqued and improved.

Future work will focus on refining the process by using it. We aim to use the process to help AI labs develop common-ground policies, governing bodies break political gridlock, and diplomats accelerate peace deals. To refine the process we aim to iterate based on the needs arising from real-world use. We expect this will lead to things like developing better process tooling, increasing process standardization, accommodating more complex policy formats, integrating objective policy quality metrics, and developing approaches to efficiently recruit globally representative participants.

Motivation.

We aim to create policies that reflect informed public will. Our core motivation is to increase the probability that the future aligns with the will of humanity. We see aligning the behavior of high-impact systems, from governments to AGI, with informed public will as instrumental to this goal. Policies specify desired system behaviors in ways that can be practically implemented. We thus focus on creating an approach for developing policies that reflect informed public will. In this pursuit, two critical challenges arise. First, public will constitutes a plurality of views about how a system should behave, with some views in direct conflict. Which views should ultimately be reflected in policies? Second, developing quality policies on most issues requires some expertise the general public lacks. How do you create policy that reflects public will yet integrates expertise?

We draw inspiration from peace negotiations and citizens' assemblies to address the first challenge, identifying which public views should be reflected in a policy. During peace negotiations, the challenge is to find points of common ground between conflicting parties that align with everyone's interests. While final agreements often go beyond points of consensus to include trade-offs between sides, identifying common ground often forms the basis for making more complicated issues surmountable. However, finding common ground typically requires a shared understanding of reality which the public often lacks, especially on contentious issues. Citizens’ assemblies create this shared understanding by providing participants with a balanced education on an issue and fostering deliberation among them to help understand other’s views. But, citizen assemblies can take months to coordinate and cost hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars to execute. Technology-enabled collective dialogues , which are increasingly common in peacebuilding , offer similar affordances, yet can be executed in hours or days for thousands of dollars by just a few people. Thus, we design our process to generate policies that reflect informed public consensus and leverage collective dialogues to educate participants, foster deliberation, and elicit informed views from which consensus can be identified.

We conceptualize policy development as an optimization process along two axes to address the second challenge, integrating expertise and public will. The first axis is representativeness and captures how well the policy reflects informed public consensus on an issue. The second axis is quality and captures the degree to which the policy is clear, unambiguous, and reflects expert knowledge. While these axes oversimplify the complex universe of desiderata one might ascribe to policy, they help factor the process in a practical way. Increasing representativeness comes from public input. Increasing quality comes from expert input. We thus design a process that iterates between public and expert input to produce policies that are high in both quality and representativeness.

Collective Dialogues.

A collective dialogue process is an iterative back-and-forth exchange between a moderator and participants. During each turn of the dialogue, participants are sent either a read-only message (text, image, or video), a poll, or an open-ended prompt that kicks off a collective response process . During a collective response process, participants first share a natural language response to the prompt, then they evaluate the responses submitted by others. The evaluation step serves two purposes: first, it exposes participants to other’s views to help them understand each other, and second, it elicits the data needed to quantify response representativeness and identify points of consensus. On the collective dialogue platform Remesh, two types of evaluations are elicited; agreement votes, and pair choice votes . However, when there are hundreds or thousands of participants, each participant is only able to vote on a small fraction of the submitted responses. Thus, elicitation inference is used to convert a sparse vote sampling into a complete vote matrix from which aggregate results, like the overall fraction of participants who agree with a response, can be computed.

During a live collective dialogue process, all participation is simultaneous and each collective response process takes a few minutes to complete. When each collective response process is completed, every participant sees the fraction of participants agreeing with their response as well as a representative subset of responses from the group . The moderator sees preliminary results as each process unfolds and final results when each completes. Those results include common topics and their frequency, the fraction of participants, overall and within each demographic segment , who agree with each response, and a plural subset of responses selected to include at least one response that each participant prefers over most others. Based on what the moderator learns from these results, they can either continue the dialogue based on their pre-programmed discussion guide or pivot in real-time to drill deeper into an issue.

A collective dialogue process can also be run asynchronously. In this case, the dialogue simply follows the pre-programmed discussion guide, with each participant starting and completing the dialogue on their own timeline. During each collective response process within the dialogue, participants still evaluate the responses of the participants who came before them, but they do not see the overall agreement with their response nor the set of representative responses. When the dialogue concludes, the same set of results are available regardless of the modality being asynchronous or live. Overall, an asynchronous collective dialogue is logistically easier to execute, but it comes at the cost of the flexibility of live moderation and the convergent feedback loop of participants seeing live representative results. We experiment with using both modalities in our policy development process.

Democratic process.

The democratic process takes a policy issue and target public as input and outputs a quality representative policy along with the public’s support for the policy and its consistency with precedent policy like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The process combines collective dialogues (via Remesh) to scale public deliberation with bridging-based ranking to identify points of consensus. A GPT4-powered pipeline rapidly translates points of consensus into representative policy clauses from which an initial policy is assembled. Experts refine the policy to produce a higher-quality version. The policy is further refined to be more representative through another collective dialogue with the public. Then the final policy is evaluated. Support for the final policy is assessed through a collective dialogue with a legitimately representative public, and consistency with precedent policy is estimated using GPT4. Before the process begins, two decisions must be made: Policy issue: What issue will the process develop policy to address? This can be specified in the form of a question, ie. “How should AI assistants handle requests for medical advice?” Target public: What public will the process aim to represent in the policy it generates? This determines who the participants recruited for the process need to be representative of, ie. “US citizens,” “Humanity,” etc.

Learn Public Views.

Inputs: Policy issue, target public.

Outputs: Collective dialogue data containing informed public views on policy issue.

A collective dialogue is run via Remesh with a group of participants selected to be representative of the target public. During the collective dialogue, participants learn about the policy issue, deliberate the issue, and then their (now informed) views on the issue are elicited. The facilitation team executes the following:

First, Create a discussion guide on Remesh for the collective dialogue to follow which gathers appropriate demographics, sets context and educates participants on the issue, facilitates deliberation around the issue, and finally elicits participants' views on the issue (. Second, Recruit a representative public to participate in the collective dialogue by selecting a set of participants whose demographic distribution matches that of the target population. For example, we recruited sets of 200-300 participants representing the US public using census-balanced sampling techniques implemented on Prolific. Third, Moderate the collective dialogue through a combination of sending pre-programmed items from the discussion guide and pivoting or probing to ask new questions on the fly as unexpected issues, contentions, and ideas are surfaced.

Create Initial Policy.

Inputs: Collective dialogue data containing informed public views on a policy issue.

Outputs: Initial policy reflecting informed public consensus.

From the views elicited during the collective dialogue, bridging-based ranking is used to automatically identify points of consensus. Then a GPT4-powered pipeline is used to rapidly translate consensus points into representative policy clauses from which an initial policy is assembled. This is executed through the following process:

First, For each collective response prompt in the elicitation : First, Select responses with the highest bridging agreement. Second, Summarize the ideas in those responses and generate policy clauses using GPT4. Third, For each policy clause generated: First, Find the response most related to that clause. Second, Estimate how well that response justifies that clause.

Second, Merge all policy clauses into one list and rank by strength of justification. Third, Choose a subset of generated clauses to become the initial policy

Steps 1 and 2 are done using an automated pipeline. Step 3 is done manually by the process facilitators.

Expert Refinement.

Inputs: Initial policy reflecting informed public consensus.

Outputs: Higher-quality policy integrating domain expertise.

The facilitation team identifies experts relevant to the policy issue and shares the initial policy with them. Those experts provide feedback on the initial policy; they offer suggested revisions that better reflect domain expertise or improve clarity, and point out gaps or edge cases the policy does not address. The facilitation team then refines the policy based on this input. This cycle of expert feedback and revision can happen multiple times, and can sometimes include automated tools for edge case analysis.

Public Refinement.

Inputs: Higher-quality policy integrating domain expertise, target public.

Outputs: High-quality representative policy, citizens’ statement

A collective dialogue is run via Remesh with a group of participants selected to be representative of the target public. During the collective dialogue, participants learn about the policy issue, review the latest version of the policy, provide feedback on it, and contribute reasons for and against supporting it. The policy is refined based on the provided feedback to produce a version that is more representative, and a sort of citizens' statement is assembled from the reasons for and against supporting it. The facilitation team executes the following. First, Create a discussion guide on Remesh for the collective dialogue to follow which collects participants' demographics, sets context and educates them on the issue, presents the policy, elicits feedback on the policy, and elicits arguments for or against the policy. Second, Recruit a representative public to participate in the collective dialogue by selecting a set of participants whose demographic distribution matches that of the target population. Third, Refine the policy based on public feedback collected during the collective dialogue. For example, one can identify the concerns of participants who do not support the policy and tweak the policy to better address them. Fourth, Assemble a 'citizens statement' by selecting a diverse collection of the most agreed-upon reasons for and against supporting the policy elicited during the collective dialogue.

Evaluation.

Inputs: High-quality representative policy, citizens’ statement, target public.

Outputs: Legitimate measures of support for final policy, consistency with human rights.

A collective dialogue is conducted with a large-scale, highly representative public to assess measures of support for the policy. During the collective dialogue, participants learn about the policy issue and the policy development process, review the final policy, and vote on their support for each clause and the policy overall. Additionally, consistency between the final policy and precedent policy (ie. the Universal Declaration of Human Rights) is estimated using GPT4. The facilitation team executes the following:

First, Create a discussion guide on Remesh for the collective dialogue to follow which collects participants' demographics, sets context and educates them on the issue, presents the policy along with the "citizens' statement", and then measures their support for the policy overall as well as each of its clauses. Second, Recruit a highly representative public to participate in the collective dialogue by selecting a set of participants whose demographic distribution matches that of the target population. For example, we recruited sets of 1000 participants representing the US public for this step using census-balanced sampling techniques implemented on Prolific. Third, Compute support measures from collective dialogue data, including overall support for the policy as well as bridging support for the policy (ie. the lowest support observed across a range of demographic groups). Fourth, Estimate policy consistency with the precedent policy like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. To do this each clause of the policy is compared with each precedent clause and assessed via GPT4 to be either consistent, neutral, or conflicting.

Experiments.

We ran the process outlined above three times to develop policy guidelines around how AI assistants should handle situations related to: First, Medical advice Second, Wars and conflicts Third, Vaccines

We chose the United States as the target public. Each process run took around two weeks and incorporated democratic inputs from 1500+ people through collective dialogues run on Remesh , including around 5000 responses to collective response prompts and nearly 100,000 votes. Participants were recruited using census-balanced sampling techniques via Prolific to be representative of the US public. Participants were paid between dollar 12-15 / hour USD for their time and the total cost per run was on the order of dollar 10,000 USD. Experts for each process run were recruited via the process facilitators' personal networks and included AI policy experts, doctors and medical researchers, UN personnel, and participants from prior bi-partisan vaccine dialogues.

Results.

Policy evaluation.

The final policies generated by the process for each issue can be found . We measured overall support for the three policies to be between 75-81 percent, and bridging support to be between 70-75 percent across demographic groups spanning age, gender, religion, race, education, and political party . Overall support for individual policy clauses ranged from 63-95 percent. Zero conflicts with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were found and a consistent relationship was estimated between individual human rights and policy clauses between 13-27 percent of the time (the rest being neutral). Overall, we observed that the policies resulting from the process took a form closer to human-readable guidelines than intricate technical policies, here is an example clause from each policy: Avoid implying fatal outcomes: Do not diagnose fatal conditions or suggest a user may be dying, except in emergency situations where a user is urged to call emergency services because their life may be at risk. Do not produce misinformation: Do not generate any text, images, videos, or data sets related to conflicts which mimic the appearance of credible news, evidence, analysis, or statements by world leaders. Prioritize science over corporate vaccine information: In cases of contradiction between pharmaceutical company information and medical journals, prioritize medical journals.

The motivation for running the process on vaccine information was to pressure test how well the process could find consensus and generate bridging policy guidelines around a topic with significant political division. All policy guidelines our process generated, including on vaccine information, had 72 percent+ support across Democrats, Independents, and Republicans . This suggests our process is capable of generating policy guidelines that bridge divides even on divisive issues.

Evidence for deliberative state change.

A hallmark of deliberation is that participants update their views. We tested for this in a simple way during some collective dialogues. In the spirit of a deliberative poll, we asked participants a question before and after a few different deliberative activities. We asked participants before and after collective dialogues 1 and 2 if they thought “the public has the insights useful to guide how AI assistants answer difficult questions” , the fraction who said “yes” increased every time . We asked participants during collective dialogue 3 if they supported a given policy before and after they were asked to evaluate each individual clause, the fraction who said they supported it increased every time. We view these results as basic evidence of deliberative state change resulting from participation in collective dialogues.

Participant perceptions.

We evaluated participants’ perceptions of the process by asking them three Likert scale questions at the end of each collective dialogue. Prior to asking these questions we first provided context on the goal of the broader process and how the dialogue they just participated in relates to the process. shows the results of those questions aggregated across collective dialogues. Overall, 87 percent of participants tended to find the experience enjoyable or meaningful, 75 percent tended to trust the process, and 79 percent believed their contributions would be used appropriately .

Intended Uses and Limitations.

The intended use of this process is to develop common ground policies that bridge demographic divides and reflect what a given population wants. It is ideal for AI labs and governing bodies that have to make policy decisions that impact large populations, and want a democratic process to align those decisions with informed public will. It works well for situations where it is important to have unbiased policies and does a good job of finding consensus across conflicting sides of divisive issues. However, the current version of the process manifests a range of constraints and limitations. Below we discuss those challenges and sketch potential mitigation approaches that can guide future work.

First,

Issue education: The process is only effective for policy issues that the general public can be reasonably educated on in a short period of time. Further, all participants currently receive the same educational materials, even though people may come into a process with very different levels of context. This may be mitigated with a longer process with for example, expert Q and A, and/or the use of chatbots to provide personalized education.

Second, Public recruitability: The extent to which this process is democratic depends on those who can participate. It requires recruiting a representative sample of a target public to participate in collective dialogues. This limits the process to target publics which are generally online and technologically literate. This be may mitigated with on-the-ground support for less connected or technologically literate populations, integration with established messaging applications or voice calling, and improved worldwide sampling and sortition infrastructure.

Third, Policy complexity: The process can produce policies that take the form of clear human-readable guidelines, but may struggle to directly produce long, complex, and technical policies. The types of policies produced even by the current process can serve as guidelines for the creation of more complex policies. Policy length challenges may also be mitigated by having multiple processes, each focused on a subarea, in combination with some form of reconciliation process

Fourth, Policy implementability: Directly implementable policies often require 'tighter' language than our current process produces; with clear definitions and careful handling of edge cases or loopholes. Facilitation tweaks appropriate to implementation contexts may help overcome some of these challenges, and additional collective dialogues (or alternative subprocesses) might be added specifically for refining definitions and addressing edge cases and loopholes.

Fifth, Facilitator decisions: The process relies on the process facilitators to make a range of decisions with significant impacts. This makes the success of the process dependent on the competency and judgment of the facilitator(s), and creates a risk that biased or ignorant facilitators can harm process legitimacy. This can be mitigated with additional standardization of these decisions-making steps, through careful automation and/or strict adherence to a detailed facilitation guide (reducing ad-hoc decisions), robust governance of the facilitation, and extensive transparency measures.

Sixth, Consensus-focused: The bridging-based ranking step aims to identify points of consensus from which the initial policy is created. However, there may be some aspects of an issue where no consensus exists, yet a decision must be made, and this process does not directly handle that case. Depending on the context, the bridging metric used for ranking may be replaced with other representation metrics; like a simple approval vote count for the representative population, or something more nuanced.

Seventh, Impersonal interaction: Because all interactions are text-based and mediated by the platform, people don't directly interact or get to know one another. This is by design and reduces biases, but could be changed by replacing collective dialogues with some other approach or augmenting them with different approaches to personal interaction.

Eighth, Evaluating quality: While the process is designed to generate policies that reflect some general notions of “quality” it does not include any methods to objectively evaluate policy quality. Best practices and objective measures of policy quality could be incorporated into metrics and used within the process.

Beyond these concrete limitations, it is worth noting that the goal for this work was to demonstrate an end-to-end proof of concept, not a polished system. Every aspect of every step of this process can be critiqued and improved, but we see it as a starting point for promising exploration; one that is already directly usable for developing guidelines with the caveats stated above. Moreover, many status quo decision-making processes that are regularly used have far more limitations.

Future work.

The work presented in this paper represents what we were able be accomplish in a three month period during our participation in OpenAI's Democratic inputs to AI program. As we continue building on this work, we are interested in collaborating on: AI policy development: enabling bridging policy development for real AI systems. Quality metrics: developing or implementing objective measures of policy quality. Global sample: developing an approach to recruit globally representative participants. Process tooling: building and experimenting with different tools to improve the process. Peace agreements: applying process and tools to accelerate peace deals. Political gridlock: enabling development of bridging policies that break political gridlocks.

Thanks for listening. This has been an audio narration of Democratic Policy Development using Collective Dialogues and AI. By Andrew Konya, Lisa Schirch, Colin Irwin, and 1 more author. Published on November 3, 2023. Narrated by unarxiv dot org.